i 
 
For Official Use 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ESTACODE 
(EDITION-2021) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED & PUBLISHED BY 
PAKISTAN PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION RESEARCH CENTRE 
ESTABLISHMENT DIVISION 
CABINET SECRETARIAT  
ISLAMABAD 
2021 

ii 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright (C) 2021, 
Director General, Pakistan Public Administration Research Centre, Islamabad. 
 
All rights reserved. 
No Part of this publication can be reproduced in any form or by any means without prior 
permission in writing from Director General, Pakistan Public Administration Research 
Centre, Islamabad.  

iii 
 
FOREWORD 
Compilation and Publication of administrative and establishment manuals is one 
of the key functions assigned to Pakistan Public Administration Research Center 
(PPARC). PPARC is tasked for provision of updated information in the forms of 
manuals, publications and Federal Government census data for informed decision making 
and best administrative practices in the Government.  
2. 
This publication includes all in-vogue amendments/new instructions 
issued by concerned authorities. Obsolete, redundant, overlapped instructions have been 
struck out. Efforts have been made to make it more comprehensive, authenticated and 
sequential. The importance of the publication such as Esta-Code depends upon it being 
maintained up-to-date by incorporating periodical amendments in the laws & rules in the 
recent years.  
3. 
I take this opportunity to place on record our sincere thanks to ex-
Secretaries, Special Secretaries and Additional Secretaries who made contributions 
towards this publication during their respective tenures. It is pertinent to acknowledge the 
efforts made by current Special Secretary, Additional Secretaries and all officers of 
Establishment Division, as well as, representatives of all concerned stakeholders in 
finalization of this edition of Esta-Code within stipulated timeframe.   
4. 
I hope that readers/users including researchers will find this publication a 
useful tool in their field of activity.  
5. 
To make it more qualitative, any suggestions for further improvement will 
be highly appreciated, if those are addressed to the Director General (PPARC).  
 
 
(Inamullah Khan Dharejo) 
Secretary Establishment 
Islamabad June, 2022 
       
 
 
 
 

iv 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

v 
 
PREFACE 
 
Pakistan Public Administration Research Center (PPARC) has published six 
editions of Esta-Code i.e. 1979, 1983, 1989, 2000, 2007 and 2015. The exercise for 
revision of Esta-Code is taken up every five years, with a view to provide the up-to-date 
version of rules and regulations in consolidated form. PPARC initiated and extensive 
exercise of information collection which had been disseminated by major stakeholders 
i.e. Establishment, Finance, Cabinet Divisions and Federal Public Service Commission. 
2. 
During holistic review, to make it sequential and more comprehensive, 
the contents and text of this edition have been re-aligned. The information has been 
systematically organized and the stakeholders have certified the contents under their 
respective domain as regards their authenticity. In the course of review, the top hierarchy 
of Establishment Division provided guidance and inspiration to the team of PPARC in 
achieving this milestone within stipulated time frame (i.e. cutoff date for updating was set 
as 31st December, 2021). In revamping of Esta-Code (Edition-2021), indeed the 
endeavors of officers and officials of PPARC deserve much appreciation, who performed 
meticulously.  
3. 
Esta-Code (Edition-2021), is being put on the website of Establishment 
Division i.e. www.establishment.gov.pk & https://pparc.establishment.gov.pk for those who 
are interested to download. To make it more qualitative, errors, omissions and suggestions 
are welcome please. 
 
 
(Muhammad Lakhkar Khan Hoti) 
Director General 
Islamabad June, 2022 

vi 
 

vii 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“Civil Service is the Backbone of the State. Governments 
are formed and Governments are defeated. Prime Ministers 
come and go; but you stay on, and therefore, there is a very 
great responsibility placed on your shoulders.” 
 
 
 
Founder of Pakistan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

viii 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ix 
 
ESTACODE 
(EDITION-2021) 
 
CHAPTER CONTENTS 
 
CHAPTERS 
 
SUBJECT 
Sl.  
No(s). 
Page  
 No(s). 
Chapter-1 
Constitutional Provisions  
1-2 
1-8 
Chapter-2 
Civil Services Structure  
1-5 
9-92 
Chapter-3 
Recruitment & Induction 
1-9 
93-308 
Chapter-4 
Appointments  
1-16 
309-462 
Chapter-5 
The Revised Leave Rules 
1-15 
463-506 
Chapter-6  
Transfers, Postings & Rotation  
1-22 
507-609 
Chapter-7 
Career Planning, Promotion & Training  
1-15 
611-734 
Chapter-8 
Conduct, Efficiency & Discipline 
1-36 
735-896 
Chapter-9 
Retirement & Severance  
1-11 
897-944 
Chapter-10 
Appeals, Petitions & Representations 
1-6 
945-971 
 
Index 
- 
973-1047 

CHAPTER 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS  
 (1-2) 

CHAPTER-1                                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 3                
 
 
CHAPTER-1 
CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS  
 
 
 
__________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sl.No. 
Subjects 
Page  
Nos. 
1. 
Constitutional Provisions .........................................................................  
5-8 
2. 
The Civil Servants (Validation of Rules) Ordinance,2001 ......................  
8 

 Page -4                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                            CHAPTER-1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-1                                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 5                
 
 
CHAPTER-1 
CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS 
1.1 
CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS 
Extracts from the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973: Part XII 
Miscellaneous, Chapter I– Services.– 
Article 240– Subject to the Constitution, the appointments to and the conditions of service of 
persons in the service of Pakistan shall be determined– 
(a) 
in the case of the services of the Federation, posts in 
connection with the affairs of the Federation and All 
Pakistan Service, by or under Act of  [Majlis-e-Shoora 
(Parliament)]; and 
(b) 
in the case of the services of a Province and posts in 
connection with the affairs of a  Province, by or under Act of 
the Provincial Assembly. 
 
Explanation.– In this Article, "All-Pakistan Service" means a 
service common to the Federation and the Provinces, which was in 
existence immediately before the commencing day or which may be 
created by Act of  *[Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament)]. 
Article 241– Until the appropriate Legislature makes a law under Article 
240, all rules and orders in force immediately before the commencing day 
shall, so far as consistent with the provisions of the Constitution, continue 
in force and may be amended from time to time by the Federal 
Government or, as the case may be, the Provincial Government. 
Article 242– (1) [Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament)] in relation to the affairs 
of the Federation, and the Provincial Assembly of a Province in relation to 
affairs of the Province, may, by law, provide for the establishment and 
constitution of a Public Service Commission. 
 
[(1A)The Chairman of the Public Service Commission 
constituted in relation to the affairs of the Federation shall be appointed by 
the President in his discretion.] 
(2)   A Public Service Commission shall perform such functions 
as may be prescribed by law. 
Article 268– (1) Except as provided by this Article, all existing laws shall, 
subject to the Constitution, continue in force, so far as applicable and with 
the necessary adaptations, until altered, repealed or amended by the 
appropriate Legislature. 
 
(2) 
The laws specified in the Sixth Schedule shall not be 
altered, repealed or amended [expressly or impliedly,] without the 
                                                          
 Subs. by P.O No. 14 of 1985, Art. 2 and Sch., for ‗Parliament‘. 
 Ins. by P.O. 14 of 1985 w.e.f. 2 March 1985. 
 Added by Legal Framework Order, 2002. 
Existing rules, 
etc., to continue 
Appointments 
to 
service 
of 
Pakistan 
and 
conditions 
of  
service 
Continuance in 
force, and 
adaptation of, 
certain laws. 

 Page -6                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                            CHAPTER-1 
 
 
previous sanction of the President *[accorded after consultation with the 
Prime Minister]. 
 
(3) 
For the purpose of bringing the provisions of any existing 
law into accord with the provisions of the Constitution (other than Part II 
of the Constitution), the President may by Order, within a period of two 
years from the commencing day, make such adaptation, whether by way of 
modification, addition or omission, as he may deem to be necessary or 
expedient, and any such Order may be made so as to have effect from such 
day, not being a day earlier than the commencing day, as may be specified in 
the Order. 
 
(4)   
The President may authorize** the Governor of a Province to 
exercise, in relation to the Province, the powers conferred on the President 
by clause (3) in respect of laws relating to matters with respect to which 
the Provincial Assembly has power to make laws. 
 
(5)   
The powers exercisable under clause (3) and (4) shall be 
subject to the provisions of an Act of the appropriate Legislature. 
 
(6)  
Any court, tribunal or authority required or empowered to 
enforce an existing law shall, notwithstanding that no adaptations have 
been made in such law by an Order made under clause (3) or clause (4), 
construe the law with all such adaptations as are necessary to bring it 
into accord with the provisions of the Constitution. 
(7)  In this Article, ―existing laws‖ means all laws (including 
Ordinances, Orders-in-Council, Orders, rules, bye-laws, regulations and 
Letters Patent constituting a High Court, and any notifications and other 
legal instruments having the force of law) in force in Pakistan or any part 
thereof, or having extra-territorial validity, immediately before the 
commencing day. 
Explanation. In this Article, ―in force‖, in relation to any laws, means 
having effect as law whether or not the law has been brought into 
operation. 
Article 212– (1) Notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained, 
the appropriate Legislature may by Act [provide for the establishment 
of] one or more Administrative Courts or Tribunals to exercise exclusive 
jurisdiction in respect of— 
(a) 
matters relating to the terms and conditions of persons [who 
 
are or have been] in the service of Pakistan, including 
 
disciplinary matters; 
(b) 
matters relating to claims arising from tortious acts of Government, 
 
or any person in the service of Pakistan, or of any local or other 
 
authority empowered by law to levy any tax or cess and any 
 
servant of such authority acting in the discharge of his duties 
 
as such servant; or 
                                                          
* Added by Legal Framework Order, 2002. 
** For such authorization, see Gazette of Pakistan, 1973, Extraordinary, Part II, page 2001. 
Subs. and shall be deemed always to have been so substituted by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act,  
 
1974 (33 of 1974), section 12, for ―establish‖.  
Administrative 
Courts and 
Tribunals 

CHAPTER-1                                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 7                
 
 
(c) 
matters relating to the acquisition, administration and 
disposal of any property which is deemed to be enemy 
property under any law. 
 
(2) 
Notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained, where any 
Administrative Court or Tribunal is established under clause (1), no other 
court shall grant an injunction, make any order or entertain any proceeding in 
respect of any matter to which the jurisdiction of such Administrative Court 
or Tribunal extends [and all proceedings in respect of any such matter which 
may be pending before such other court immediately before the 
establishment of the Administrative Court or Tribunal **[other than an appeal 
pending before the Supreme Court] shall abate on such establishment]: 
 
Provided that the provisions of this clause shall not apply to an 
Administrative Court or Tribunal established under an Act of a 
Provincial Assembly unless, at the request of that Assembly made in 
the form of a resolution, ***[Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament)] @by law 
extends the provisions to such a Court or Tribunal. 
 
(3) 
An appeal to the Supreme Court from a judgment, 
decree, order or sentence of an Administrative Court or Tribunal shall 
lie only if the Supreme Court, being satisfied that the case involves a 
substantial question of law of public importance, grants leave to appeal. 
Article 27– (1) No citizen otherwise qualified for appointment in the 
service of Pakistan shall be discriminated against in respect of any such 
appointment on the ground only of race, religion, caste, sex, residence or 
place of birth: 
 
Provided that, for a period not exceeding @@[Forty] years from 
the commencing day, posts may be reserved for persons belonging to any 
class or area to secure their adequate representation in the service of 
Pakistan: 
 
Provided further that, in the interest of the said service, 
specified posts or services may be reserved for members of either sex if 
such posts or services entail the performance of duties and functions 
which cannot be adequately performed by members of the other 
sex@@@[:] 
 
@@@Provided also that under-representation of any class or 
area in the service of Pakistan may be redressed in such manner as may 
be determined by an Act of Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament). 
                                                          
 Ins. and shall be deemed always to have been so inserted by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1974 
(33  of 1974), section 12.  
** Ins. and shall be deemed always to have been so inserted by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1976 
(62 of 1976), section 15.  
*** Subs. by P.O. No. 14 of 1985, Art. 2 and Sch., for ‗Parliaments‘. 
@ For such law, see the Provincial Service Tribunal (Extension of Provisions of the Constitution) Act,  
    1974 (32 of 1974). 
@@Subs. and shall be deemed always to have been so substitutes by the constitution (16th  
      Amendment Act, 1999 (VII of 1999) s. 2 for Twenty which was previously sub. by P.O. No. 14 of  
     1985. Art. 2 and Sch., for ‗ten‘. 
@@@  Subs. and Ins. vide 18th Constitutional amendment s.10 dated 20-04-2010.  
Safeguard 
against 
discrimination 
in services.

 Page -8                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                            CHAPTER-1 
 
 
  
(2) 
Nothing in clause (1) shall prevent any Provincial 
Government, or any local or other authority in a Province,  from 
prescribing,  in relation to any post or class of service under that Government 
or authority, conditions as to residence in the Province, for a period not 
exceeding three years, prior to appointment under that Government or 
authority. 
 
1.2 
The Civil Servants (Validation of Rules)  
 
 
Ordinance, 2001 
ORDINANCE NO. II OF 2001 
AN 
ORDINANCE 
 
To validate certain rules made under the Civil Servants Act, 1973 and certain 
actions taken thereunder– 
 
WHEREAS it is expedient to validate certain rules made under the Civil Servants Act, 
1973 (LXXIII of 1973), for the purpose hereinafter appearing; 
 
AND WHEREAS the National Assembly and the Senate stand suspended in pursuance 
of the Proclamation of Emergency of the fourteenth day of October 1999, and the Provisional 
Constitution Order No. 1 of 1999; 
 
AND WHEREAS the President is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it 
necessary to take immediate action; 
 
NOW, THEREFORE, in pursuance of the Proclamation of Emergency of the 
fourteenth day of October, 1999, and the Provisional Constitution Order No.1 of 1999, read 
with the Provisional Constitution (Amendment) Order No.9 of 1999, and in exercise of all 
powers enabling him in that behalf, the President of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan is 
pleased to make and promulgate the following Ordinance:–  
 
1. 
Short title and commencement.–(1) This Ordinance may be called the 
Civil Servants (Validation of Rules) Ordinance, 2001. 
 
 (2) It shall come into force at once. 
 
2. 
Validation of certain rules.–(1) The Civil Servants Occupational Groups 
and Services (Probation, Training and Seniority) Rules, 1990, the Civil Servants (Seniority) 
Rules, 1993 and the Civil Servants (Confirmation) Rules, 1993 and all notifications amending 
the aforesaid Rules immediately before the commencement of the Ordinance are hereby 
affirmed and shall be deemed always to have been validly made. 
 
(2) 
 All orders made, proceedings taken, acts done, instructions issued, powers 
exercised, appointments made thereunder by any authority which were made, taken, done 
or purported to have been made, taken, done, issued, or exercised immediately before the 
commencement of this Ordinance shall be deemed to have been validly made, taken, 
done, issued or exercised and deemed always to have had effect accordingly. 
________________ 

CHAPTER 2  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CIVIL SERVICES STRUCTURE 
 (9-10) 

CHAPTER-2                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page -11                                                             
 
 
CHAPTER 2 
CIVIL SERVICES STRUCTURE 
 
3.1 
Occupational Groups and Services (Probation, Training and 
 
  
Seniority) Rules,1990 ..................................................................  
 
3.2 
Occupational Groups and Services (Final Passing Out 
Examination) Rules, 2003 .............................................................  
75-79 
 
79-80 
Sl.No. 
Subjects 
Page  
Nos. 
 
1.1 
C.S.P. Resolution and Principal Decisions of Government .......  
13-16 
 
1.2 
Civil Service of Pakistan (Composition and Cadre) Rules, 1954 . 
16-22 
 
1.3 
Creation/Abolition of Posts of Joint Secretary, Deputy  Secretary 
 
and Section Officers ..................................................................... 
22 
 
1.4 
Clarification Regarding Occupational Groups and Services 
 
(Probation, Training and Seniority) Rules,1990 
22-23 
 
I. 
RULES AND PROCEDURES APPLICABLE TO 
  OCCUPATIONAL GROUPS/SERVICES 
 
 
2.1 
Commerce and Trade Group .................................................... 
24-26 
 
2.2 
Pakistan Customs Service ............................................................ 
26-28 
 
2.3 
Inland Revenue Service ................................................................ 
28-30 
 
2.4 
Tax Administration Reforms: Reorganization of Federal Board of 
Revenue - creation of new occupational service namely Inland 
Revenue Service ........................................................................... 
30-33 
 
2.5 
Pakistan Administrative Service ................................................... 
33-36 
 
2.6 
Classification of Districts ............................................................. 
36 
 
2.7 
Economists and Planners Group ................................................... 
37-39 
 
2.8 
Foreign Service of Pakistan .......................................................... 
40-42 
 
2.9 
Information Group........................................................................ 
42-47 
 
2.10 
Military Lands and Cantonments Group ...................................... 
47-49 
 
2.11 
Office Management Group ........................................................... 
49-53 
 
2.12 
Pakistan Audit and Accounts Service ........................................... 
53-57 
 
2.13 
Police Service of Pakistan (Composition, Cadre & Seniority) 
Rules,1985   .................................................................................. 
57-68 
 
2.14 
Postal Group ................................................................................. 
68-70 
 
2.15 
Secretariat Group.......................................................................... 
70-72 
 
2.16 
Railways (Commercial & Transportation) Group ........................ 
72-74 
II. SENIORITY & LENGTH OF SERVICES  

Page -12                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-2                                                     
 
 
Sl.No. 
Subjects 
Page  
Nos. 
 
4.1 
Determination of Seniority/Length of Service of All 
  
Occupational Groups and Services ............................................
 
80 
 
 4.2 
Determination of Inter-se-Seniority of Officers of All 
  
Occupational Groups  ....................................................................
4.3 
Determination of Inter-se-Seniority of Officers of All 
Occupational Groups and Services................................................
81 
 
80 
 
4.4 
Determination of Length of Service in Case of Repeaters ............
4.5 
Determination of Inter-se-Seniority of Officers of All 
Occupational Groups and Services ................................................
81 
81-82 
 
4.6 
Determination of Inter-se-Seniority of Probationers of All 
Occupational Groups and Services who Repeat Their CTP 
Due to Unsatisfactory Performance ..............................................
4.7 
Determination of Length of Service in Case of Repeaters ............
4.8 
Determination of Length of Service in Case of Repeaters ............
4.9 
Determination of Inter-se-Seniority when Specialized Training 
Programme (STP) is Deferred/repeated ........................................
83 
 
 
83 
83-84 
84-85 
 
 
4.10 Section Officers' (Probation, Training and Seniority) Rules, 1964......
85-87 
 
4.11 Fixation of „Inter-se-Seniority‟ of Section Officers appointed 
by Direct Recruitment ...................................................................
87-88 
 
4.12 Seniority of Joint Secretaries and Holders of Former Senior 
Administrative Grade ....................................................................
88 
  
III. CHANGE OF OCCUPATIONAL 
GROUPS/SERVICES 
 
 
5.1 
Change of Occupational Groups/Services ..............................
90 
 
5.2 
Change of Occupational Group Prohibition Against Mutual 
Exchange ......................................................................................
90 
 
5.3 
Initial Training of the Probationers appointed to various 
Groups/Services on the Results of the Annual Competitive 
Examination held by the FPSC .....................................................
90-92 
_________________ 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-2                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page -13                                                             
 
 
CHAPTER 2 
CIVIL SERVICES STRUCTURE 
1.1 
C.S.P. Resolution and Principal 
Decisions of Government 
Cabinet Secretariat 
(Establishment Branch) 
Karachi, the 8th November, 1950 
RESOLUTION 
No.F.25/4/50-Ests(SEI).— Before the Partition, the premier administrative 
Service in India was the Indian Civil Service. This was a single service divided up into a 
number of cadres on a Provincial basis. Officers appointed to this Service were allotted to 
the various Provinces and they remained members of the Indian Civil Service cadre of 
their Provinces throughout their careers. The Central Government met their own needs 
by the deputation of officers from the provinces. There was also in undivided India the 
Indian Political Service, the two main sources of recruitment to which were the Indian 
Civil Service and the Indian Army. 
2. 
The Government of Pakistan have decided to constitute their Civil Service 
as a centralized Service on a All-Pakistan Basis. It will be called THE CIVIL SERVICE 
OF PAKISTAN. This decision has been taken in order to create a well-knit Civil Service 
for the whole of Pakistan, constituted and operated on a centralized basis, thereby 
increasing association between the various Provinces and developing homogeneity in 
administration. The members of this Service, who shall be liable to be posted to any of 
the Provinces of the Dominion, will be administratively more useful to the *Central as 
well as the Provincial Governments than if they belonged to Provincial Cadres, because 
of the knowledge and experience they will acquire by serving in the Provinces of West 
Pakistan as well as in [East Pakistan,] and uniform standards of administration in all 
parts of the Dominion will also be achieved. 
3. 
The Civil Service of Pakistan shall consist of a *central cadre as distinct 
from the Provincial cadres of the former Indian Civil Service. All of the Service shall be 
liable to serve in any Province. 
 
The Service shall consist of posts on the cadre of the former Indian Civil Service 
in the various Provinces and on the cadre of the former Indian Political Service and of 
                                                          
 Now Federal. 
 Words ―East Pakistan‖ may be presumed as deleted.  

Page -14                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-2                                                     
 
 
most of the higher posts in the Central Secretariat. [The posts which will form this 
centralized cadre are mentioned in the Annexure]. Posts may in future be added to or 
removed from the cadre. 
4. 
The principal decisions of Government with regard to the constitution of 
the Civil Service are given below:— 
Initial Composition of the Service  
Initially, the Civil Service of Pakistan shall be composed of the following:- 
(a) 
Officers of the former Indian Civil Service and the former Indian Political 
Service employed in Pakistan in continuation of service(other than those 
who might be transferred to the Pakistan Foreign Service); 
(b) 
Officers appointed to the Pakistan Administrative Service; 
(c) 
Officers to be recruited on an ad hoc basis from the Provincial Civil 
Services, in numbers not exceeding, for each PROVINCE, 10 percent of 
the duty posts reserved for the Civil Service of Pakistan in that Province.  
The **Central Government will lay down the procedure of making recruitment 
from the Provincial Civil Services. 
Normal recruitment to the Service  
In future, recruitment to the Service shall be made by selection on the basis of an 
open competitive examination to be held each year by the Federal Public Service 
Commission except in the case of officers of the Armed Forces, who may be appointed to 
the Service on the recommendations of the Commission arrived at through an interview 
and a scrutiny of service records. 
Appointment and training 
(1) 
Appointments to the Service shall be made by the *Central Government. 
(2) 
Candidates appointed direct to the Service will be appointed on probation 
and will be required to undergo training in the Civil Service Academy at 
Lahore. 
(3) 
Rules regulating the conduct, discipline and training of probationers will 
be issued separately by the Central Government. 
(4) 
A probationer on successful completion of his probation may be 
confirmed in the Service. 
                                                          
 Now Federal. 
 Note:— The schedule to the Resolution has also been superseded by the Schedule attached to the Civil 
Service of Pakistan (Composition and Cadre) Rules,1954. Therefore Annexure stands superseded.  
 

CHAPTER-2                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page -15                                                             
 
 
Initial postings and liability for transfer  
 
(1) ..................... Transfers from one Province to another or from the Centre 
to a Province and vice versa shall be made by the Federal Government in consultation 
with the Provincial Governments concerned and shall be regulated in the interest of 
sound administration, prospects of promotion, suitability of officers for particular 
appointments and similar other considerations*....................... 
 
(2) 
The units within which the centre will make transfers shall be— 
(a) 
East Bengal, 
(b) 
Punjab, 
(c) 
@Sind, and 
(d) 
Frontier i.e. @@NWFP., Tribal Areas  
Promotion and Leave  
1. 
Promotions from the junior scale to the senior scale on an officiating basis 
may be made by the Provincial Government concerned, but the *Central Government 
shall be informed.  
2. 
Substantive appointments to the senior scale shall be made by the Federal 
Government on the recommendations of the *Pakistan Public Service Commission, who 
will ascertain the views of the Provincial Government concerned and forward them to the 
*Central Government with their own recommendations.  
3. 
Appointments at the Centre, including appointments of secretaries to 
Government, shall be treated as tenure appointments. 
4. 
The Provincial Governments may grant leave to officers of the Service for 
a period of 4 months or less. Leave in excess of 4 months shall be granted by the 
**Central Government.  
Listed Posts in Provinces 
1. 
Posts not exceeding 25 percent of the Superior posts allocated to the 
Provinces in the @@@[Annexure] shall be treated as Listed appointments, which officers 
of the Provincial Civil Services will be eligible to hold. The position shall, however, be 
reviewed after 5 years. 
2. 
Promotion to Listed Posts shall be made in consultation with the Federal 
Public Service Commission, in accordance with the procedure which may be laid down 
by the Federal Government. 
                                                          
 Omitted in view of the orders contained in the Establishment Division letter No.25/165/ 51-SEI dated the 10th 
September,1952 and letters No.9/58/59-CI dated the 13th August,1960 and 18th Nov.,1960.  
 Now Federal. 
 East Bengal stands deleted. 
@ Now Sindh 
@@ Now  K.P.K. 
@@@ Note:- 
Annexure stands superseded vide schedule attached to the Civil Service of Pakistan (Composition & Cadre) 
Rules,1954. 

Page -16                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-2                                                     
 
 
3. 
Provincial Governments may make promotions to Listed Posts only on an 
officiating basis and in each case the Federal Government shall be informed. 
Confirmations in the Listed Posts shall be made by the Federal Government, on the 
recommendations of the Provincial Governments and in consultation with the Federal 
Public Service Commission. 
4. 
In the matter of disciplinary safeguards, permanent holders of Listed Posts 
shall have the same rights as members of the Service. 
5. 
Holders of Listed Posts shall not be liable to be transferred away from 
Provinces in which they are serving except to the Centre.   
[Please also see Rule 7 of the C.S.P. (Composition and Cadre Rules,1954)] 
Appointments to Posts at the Centre 
1. 
Not less than 2/3rd of posts of Deputy Secretary at the Centre shall be 
reserved for officers of the Service. For the remaining posts in these grades, officers of 
the Service as well as officers not belonging to the Service, i.e., officers of the Central 
Services Class I, the Secretariat Service, the General Administrative Reserve and the 
Provincial Services, shall be eligible. 
 
This Decision shall be reviewed at the end of 5 years. 
2. 
Not less than 2/3rd of posts of Secretary and Joint Secretary at the Federal 
taken together shall be reserved for the Service but officers of the Service as well as 
officers not belonging to the service shall be eligible for appointment to the remaining 
posts in those grades. 
Note:— The above decisions shall apply to posts other than the posts which may be 
included in the Pool of officers which is being constituted on the lines of the 
Pool of the Finance and Commerce Departments in undivided India.  
 
5. 
ORDERED that this Resolution should be published in the official 
Gazette. 
Note:— The schedule to the Resolution has also been superseded by the Schedule 
attached to the Civil Service of Pakistan (Composition and Cadre) Rules,1954. 
 
1.2 
Civil Service of Pakistan (Composition  
 
 
and Cadre) Rules, 1954 
 
WHEREAS the President and the Governors of the Punjab, Sindh and the 
North-West Frontier Province have agreed that there shall be constituted a Service of the 
Federation to be known as the Pakistan Administrative Service and that certain posts in 
connection with the affairs of the Provinces shall be filled by members of that Service 
and specify, 'as far as need be, the conditions of service of its members, whether serving 
in posts in connection with the affairs of the Federation or of a Province: 

CHAPTER-2                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page -17                                                             
 
 
 
NOW, THEREFORE, in pursuance of that agreement and in exercise of the 
powers conferred by Article 146 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 
1973 and of all other provisions empowering him in this behalf, the President is pleased 
to make the following Rules:— 
 
1. 
These Rules may be cited as the Civil Service of Pakistan (Composition 
and Cadre) Rules, 1954. 
 
2.  
In these Rules, unless the context otherwise requires: 
 (a) 
"Cadre post" means any duty post included in the Schedule. 
 (b) 
"Commission" 
means 
the 
[Federal 
Public 
Service 
  
Commission]; 
 (c) 
"Schedule" means the Schedule to these Rules; 
 (d) 
"Service" means the Pakistan Administrative Service. 
 
3.  
Appointments to the Service shall be made by the President on the basis of 
results of open competitive examination held by the Federal Public Service Commission, 
except in the case of officers of the Armed Forces, who may be appointed to the Service 
on the recommendation of the FPSC arrived at through an interview and a scrutiny of 
service record.  
 
4.  
Persons appointed to the Service shall, unless the President otherwise 
directs, be appointed on probation and the President may make rules specifying the terms 
and incidents of such probation. In particular, he may provide for the removal from the 
Service during his term of probation of any person whose conduct and progress is 
unsatisfactory or for the withholding of increments from such persons. 
 
5.  
1) The Cadre posts shall be filled either by members of the Service or by 
persons not being members of the Service, appointed in accordance with the provisions of 
these Rules.  
 
(2) 
The tenure of the member of the Service appointed to a Provincial sub-
cadre post other than a Chief Secretary appointed under Rule 15, shall be determined by 
the [Chief Minister or a person authorized by him] by Order. 
 
(3)  The tenure of the member of the Service appointed to a Federal sub-cadre 
post shall be determined by the [Prime Minister or a person authorized by him] by 
Order. 
 
(4)  A person who is not a member of the Service, temporarily appointed to a 
Provincial or Federal sub-cadre post may not hold that post for a period exceeding one 
year, save with the approval of the **[Prime Minister or a person authorized by him] or 
the *[Chief Minister or a person authorized by him] as the case may be. 
 
6.  
[(1) The posts specified in the Schedule of the Federal sub-cadre, 
excluding the posts in the Federal Secretariat specified below, shall be reserved for the 
officers of the Pakistan Administrative Service, namely:— 
                                                          
 Subs. for ―Provincial Government‖ vide S.R.O No. 1046(I)/2020 dated 14-10-2020. 
 Subs. for ―Federal Government‖ vide ibid. 
 Subs. vide S.R.O No. 1046(I)/2020 dated 14-10-2020. 

Page -18                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-2                                                     
 
 
(i) 
80% of the sanctioned posts of Deputy Secretary. 
(ii) 
75% of the sanctioned posts of Joint Secretary. 
(iii) 100% posts of Senior Joint Secretary. 
(iv) 
35% of the sanctioned posts of Additional Secretary. 
(v) 
35% of the sanctioned posts of Federal Secretary.] 
 
(2) 
The Federal posts excluded under sub-rule (1) above, shall be reserved and 
apportioned amongst other services under the Federal responsibility, as may be specified 
by the Federal Government from time to time in public interest, keeping in view the 
deputation reserves of various services without further consultations with the federating 
units. 
 
(3) 
[Subject to the provisions of sub-rule (2) of rule 7 and based on the needs 
of various Ministries and Divisions, vacancies may, in such manner and on such terms 
and conditions as may be prescribed, be filled on temporary basis from time to time 
through a competitive process by technically qualified and experienced persons from 
open market against vacancies in BPS-19 and 20 within the share allocated to Service in 
Federal Secretariat]. 
 
7.  
(1). The sanctioned posts in the respective Provincial sub-cadre of the 
Schedule as specified below shall be reserved for the officers of the Pakistan 
Administrative Service as per agreed Posts-Sharing arrangement:— 
 
                        BS-17   BS-18    BS-19    BS-20      BS-21 
                                25%      40%      50%        60%        65% 
 
(2) 
[The officers of provincial management services or provincial civil 
services, i.e. executive and secretariat services, of the Provinces, Azad Jammu and 
Kashmir management group and secretariat group and district management service and 
office management service of Gilgit-Baltistan, recruited directly in BPS-17 through 
respective public service commission having minimum of 12 years' service in BPS-17 
and above who held a cadre post for a period of 5 years and presently holding post in 
BPS-19 in the respective service on regular basis shall be eligible for appointment in the 
Service in BPS-19 on recommendations of the Federal Public Service Commission in the 
prescribed manner. 
 
Provided that the appointments under this sub-rule shall not exceed 30% of the 
apportioned share of the Service in Federal sub-cadre in BPS-19 and above.‖;] 
 
(3) 
**[Omitted]. 
 
8. 
(1) The President, in the case of posts in connection with the affairs of the 
Federation, and the Governor in the case of posts in connection with the affairs of a 
                                                          
 Added vide S.R.O No. 1046(I)/2020 dated 14-10-2020. 
 Subs. & omitted vide S.R.O No. 1046(I)/2020 dated 14-10-2020. 

CHAPTER-2                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page -19                                                             
 
 
Province, may, as the exigencies of the public service require, appoint a person not being 
a member of the Service to any Cadre post.  
 
(2) 
Every such appointment made by a Governor shall be provisional and, if 
the person so appointed is intended to hold the appointment, for a period exceeding 3 
months, shall forthwith be reported to the President with the reasons for making it and if 
the President so directs the Governor shall thereupon cancel the appointment.  
 
(3) 
Any person appointed to hold a Cadre post under this rule shall not be 
employed in the post for a period exceeding 12 months save with the previous sanction of 
the President. 
 
9. 
(1) If a Governor proposes to keep any Cadre post in connection with the 
affairs of a Province vacant for a period exceeding 3 months, he shall forthwith make a 
report to the President of the reasons for the proposal, the period for which he proposes to 
keep the post vacant and whether it is proposed to make any and, if so, what 
arrangements for the performance of the duties of the post held in abeyance. 
 
(2) 
If the President directs that the post shall be filled, the Governor shall 
appoint a person to fill it in accordance with the provisions of these rules. 
 
10. 
The President may by special or general order temporarily dispense with 
the provisions of rules 8 and 9 requiring a Governor to report to the President any case in 
which a Cadre post is filled otherwise than under rule 7 by a person not being a member 
of the Service or in which a Cadre post is kept vacant for a period exceeding 3 months.  
 
11. 
The Governor of a Province may direct that two Cadre posts in connection 
with the affairs of a Province shall be held jointly if he considers this necessary for the 
purpose of facilitating any leave arrangement or for a period not exceeding 3 months if he 
considers this necessary for any other purpose. 
 
12. 
No change shall be made in the duties of the holder of any reserved post if, 
in the opinion of the President, the character of that post would thereby be altered: 
 
Provided that this shall not apply to a temporary change consequential on leave 
arrangements or to a change not arising from leave arrangements which will not last more 
than three months. 
 
13. 
(1) The President may from time to time, and in the case of posts in 
connection with the affairs of a Province, after consultation with the Governor of that 
Province, remove any post from the Schedule or include any post therein. 
 
(2) A Governor may, if the exigencies of the public service so require, create a 
cadre post in connection with the affairs of a Province below the rank of a Commissioner 
of a Division, for a period not exceeding three months. If subsequently the Governor 
proposes to retain that cadre post for a further period, he shall forthwith make a report to 
the President of the reasons for the proposal and the period for which he proposes to 
retain that post and shall act in accordance with such directions as the President may give. 
 
14. 
An officer belonging to the service shall be liable to serve anywhere in 
Pakistan under the Federal Government and may be deputed by that Government to serve 
under a Provincial Government. He shall submit himself to the orders of the Government 
under which he is serving for the time being and of all the officers and authorities under 

Page -20                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-2                                                     
 
 
whom he may from time to time be placed by that Government. His whole time shall be 
at the disposal of the Government under which he is serving. 
 15. (i) The transfer of an officer belonging to the Service from the Province to 
another or from the Federation to a Province or from a Province to the Federation shall be 
made by [ Prime Minister or a person authorized by him] in consultation with the [Chief 
Minister or a person authorized by him]  [  ]. 
       
(ii)  A **[Chief Minister or a person authorized by him] may post an officer 
belonging to the Service whose services have been placed at its disposal on any Cadre-
post or equivalent in the public interest, under intimation to the *[ Prime Minister or a 
person authorized by him].  
      
(iii)  An officer so deputed to a Provincial Government shall not be posted in 
higher post except with the approval of the **[Chief Minister or a person authorized by 
him] and in accordance with the prescribed procedure.  
    
(iv)  A PAS officer shall be posted as Chief Secretary in a Province by the 
*[Prime Minister or a person authorized by him] in consultation with the **[Chief Minister 
or a person authorized by him] concerned and due consideration will be given to the 
recommendations of the **[ Chief Minister or a person authorized by him]: 
 
Provided that consultation will mean the intimation of a name or a panel of names 
of PAS officers to be conveyed to the **[Chief Minister or a person authorized by him] 
concerned for such a posting, preferably in writing. If there is no response from a **[Chief 
Minister or a person authorized by him] within 15 days, the *[Prime Minister or a person 
authorized by him] will proceed to make such an appointment of the named officer or any 
such officer named on the panel and it will be deemed to have the approval of the **[Chief 
Minister or a person authorized by him] concerned:   
 
Provided further that if urgency so warrants, the *[Prime Minister or a person 
authorized by him] may convey its proposal by telephone/fax or any other means and hold 
necessary consultation with the **[Chief Minister or a person authorized by him] 
concerned. If there is no response upto 15 days, the *[Prime Minister or a person 
authorized by him]will proceed to pass appropriate orders. A written confirmation of the 
proceedings would be sent in each such case.  
 
(v)  The procedure of deputing to and withdrawal from any Province of a PAS 
officer will be the same as indicated above, except that Provincial Government may 
respond to the proposal within a period of one month.      
 
16. 
(1) The President may, by rules, provide for the conduct and discipline of 
officers of the Service, and officers of the Service shall at all times obey such rules, and 
shall perform such duties as may be assigned to them. 
  
(2)  Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, rule, contract or 
instructions to the contrary for the time being in force, any person holding a Provincial or 
                                                          
 Subs. for ―Federal Government‖ vide S.R.O No. 1046(I)/2020 dated 14-10-2020. 
 Subs. for ―Provincial Government‖ vide S.R.O No. 1046(I)/2020 dated 14-10-2020. 
 Words ―or Government concerned‖ deleted vide S.R.O No. 1046(I)/2020 dated 14-10-2020. 

CHAPTER-2                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page -21                                                             
 
 
Federal sub-Cadre post may be directed by the appropriate government to report to 
another duty post, station, for training and proceed on leave, as per prescribed procedure. 
17. 
[The Cadre Schedule to the 1954 Agreement shall be amended from 
time to time, as per Rule 7 by the Establishment Division in consultation with the 
Provinces]. 
[Authority.— Estt. Division‘s Notification No. F.25/12/51-SEI, dated 1-6-1954]. 
**Schedule of Cadre strength of the Pakistan Administrative Service 
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT 
Federal Sub-Cadre 
 
 
All posts of Deputy Secretary under the Federal Government and all posts of 
and above the rank of Joint Secretary under the Federal Government or borne on the 
strength of a Corporation set up or established by, or an organization or an establishment 
subordinate to, the Federal Government. 
 
Provincial Sub-Cadre 
 
BALOCHISTAN 
 
 
Chief Secretary  
01 
Additional Chief Secretary / Senior Member, Board of Revenue  
and equivalent posts  
05 
Divisional Commissioners / Administrative Secretaries / and 
equivalent posts 
30 
Deputy Commissioners / Additional Secretaries and equivalent posts 
25 
Additional Deputy Commissioners / Deputy Secretaries and 
equivalent posts  
26 
Assistant Commissioners and equivalent posts 
 
21 
 
PUNJAB 
Chief Secretary 
 
Senior Member, Board of Revenue / Chief Land Commissioner 
/Relief Commissioner and equivalent posts 
03 
Additional Chief Secretary / Member, Board of Revenue and 
equivalent posts 
21 
Administrative Secretaries / Divisional Commissioners and 
equivalent posts 
85 
Deputy Commissioners / Additional Secretaries and equivalent posts 
117 
Additional Deputy Commissioners / Deputy Secretaries and 
equivalent posts 
155 
Assistant Commissioners and equivalent posts 
65 
                                                          
 Subs.vide S.R.O No. 1046(I)/2020 dated 14-10-2020. 
** Subs.vide Notification No. 13/14/2020/E-5 (PAS) dated 12-03-2021. 
 

Page -22                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-2                                                     
 
 
SINDH 
Chief Secretary 
01 
Additional Chief Secretary / Senior Member, Board of Revenue 
/Commissioners and equivalent posts 
16 
Member, Board of Revenue / Administrative Secretaries and 
equivalent posts 
67 
Deputy Commissioner / Additional Secretaries and equivalent posts 
59 
Additional Commissioner / Deputy Secretaries and equivalent posts 
85 
Assistant Commissioners and equivalent posts 
98 
 
[KHYBER PAKHTUNKHWA] 
Chief Secretary 
01 
Additional Chief Secretary / Senior Member, Board of Revenue 
equivalent posts 
11 
Divisional 
Commissioners / Administrative 
Secretaries and 
equivalent posts 
47 
Deputy Commissioners / Additional Secretaries and equivalent posts 
67 
Additional Deputy Commissioners / Deputy Secretaries and 
equivalent posts 
52 
Assistant Commissioners and equivalent posts 
63 
 
1.3 
Creation/Abolition of Posts of Joint Secretary,  
 
 
Deputy Secretary and Section Officers 
 
Posts of Secretary, Joint Secretary and Deputy Secretary at the Centre are 
borne on the C.S.P. Cadre, which is administered by the Establishment Division. It has, 
however, been noticed that additions to/deletion from this Cadre are made by Ministries 
without consulting the Establishment Division. It has, therefore, been decided that prior 
concurrence of the Establishment Division in addition to that of the Ministry of Finance, 
should invariably be obtained before any additional post is created on the C.S.P. or any 
existing post is abolished. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 1/9/61-CI, dated 14-9-1961] 
 
1.4 
Clarification Regarding Occupational Groups and  
 
 
Services (Probation, Training and Seniority) Rules,1990 
 
It is observed that Ministries/Divisions controlling different occupational 
groups, other than APUG, are forwarding matters under the subject Rules,1990 for 
decision to the Establishment Division. It is hereby clarified that the term ―Appointing 
Authority‖ appearing in the said rules, means Secretary of the Ministry/Division 
controlling the respective Occupational Group, in respect of officers of BS-17 to BS-19, 
as per delegation of powers vide SRO. 276(I)/2000 dated 25-05-2000. Accordingly, 
Ministries/Divisions concerned are requested to examine and decide cases falling under 
                                                          
 Subs. for ―N.W.F.P‖ vide SRO No. 1046 (I)/2020 dated 14-10-2020. 
 Federal Government. 
DMG (District Management Group)***, successor to CSP (Civil Service of Pakistan).***‖District 
Management Group‖ renamed as ―Pakistan Administrative Service‖ vide Establishment Division‘s O.M.No. 
6/3/2012-CP-II dated 21-05-2012.  

CHAPTER-2                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page -23                                                             
 
 
purview of the said rules, at their own level keeping in view the merit of each case. 
Nevertheless, where an advice/opinion from the FPSC/Establishment Division is 
required, the Establishment Division may be invariably consulted for necessary 
views/comments.  
 
2. 
The above is circulated for information and further necessary action by all 
concerned.  
 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s U.O No. 2/7/2006-T.V dated 28-04-2007.] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page -24                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-2                                                     
 
 
I. 
RULES AND PROCEDURES APPLICABLE TO 
          OCCUPATIONAL GROUPS/SERVICES 
 
 
2.1 Commerce and Trade Group 
 
In pursuance of the Administrative Reforms, it has been decided to form another 
occupational group to be called the ―Commerce and Trade Group‖. The Group shall comprise 
posts in the following Departments and such other posts as may be included in the group from 
time to time. 
(i) 
Trade Development Authority of Pakistan. 
(ii) 
[* * *]  
(iii) National Tariff Commission. 
(iv) Cotton Board. 
(v) 
Department of Insurance.                                   
(vi) Trade Marks Registry. 
 
 
2. 
The Group will be under the administrative control of the Ministry of 
Commerce and will function within the following framework of rules and procedure. 
 
3. 
**Grades 1 to 16.—Each Department/ Office will operate separately as 
hithertofore. The existing instructions in regard to direct recruitment and promotion 
quotas, the composition of Departmental Promotion and Selection Committees, the 
Appointing Authorities for various **grades etc. will continue to apply. The provisions of 
recruitment rules already framed for various categories of posts with the approval of 
Establishment Division will also continue to apply. All posts to be filled by direct 
recruitment will be advertised, except posts in **Grade 16 which will be reported to the 
Federal Public Service Commission. 
 
***4. Grade 17.—@[Sixty per cent of posts in **Grade 17 will be filled through 
competitive examination to be conducted by the F.P.S.C. and 40% by promotion from 
amongst the Departmental incumbents holding posts in **Grade 11 and above.] After 
completion of integrated training at the Academy for Administrative Training@@, the 
probationer officers allocated to the ―Commerce and Trade Group‖ will undergo common 
departmental training@@@ to be followed by a departmental examination, the details of 
which will be worked out by the Secretary, Ministry of Commerce, in consultation with 
this Division and the Federal Public Service Commission. Thereafter, they will be 
allocated to a particular department. They will ordinarily remain in that department until 
they get promotion to the higher grade. With the exception of very special cases, there 
will be no horizontal movement at this stage from one Department to the other. 
                                                          
Import & Export (Control) Department deleted vide Cabinet Division‘s Memo No. 412/92-Min.I, dated 
25.01.1997. 
** BPS. 
***Para 4 to be seen in light of Occupational Groups and Services (Probation, Training and Seniority) Rules, 
1990. 
@Subs. vide Estt. Division O.M. No. 3/3/86-CP-2 dated 8-9-1987. 
@@ Civil Services Academy (CSA). May be read as such in subsequent Sl. Nos. wherever it occurs. 
@@@ There is now a Foreign Trade Institute of Pakistan. 

CHAPTER-2                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page -25                                                             
 
 
 
5. 
*Grade 18 and above.— Posts will be filled by promotion or direct  
recruitment in  accordance  with the procedure laid down in the Civil Servants 
(Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973 and other instructions issued from 
time to time or by horizontal movement of suitably qualified and experienced officer 
from other groups. In case of appointment of Director General ML&C, the Prime 
Minister may appoint any officer of the corresponding rank/grade and having 
required/special expertise and experience on secondment. 
 
6. 
Eligibility for posts in the Secretariat.—Officers of Commerce and Trade 
Group will be eligible for Secretariat posts i.e. Deputy Secretary and Joint Secretary, by 
horizontal movement, as well as by lateral entry through examination etc. 
 
7. 
For posts in **Grades 21 and 22.—Additional Secretaries and Secretaries 
and equivalent, the selection would be made from amongst Government servants of 
Grade 20 and above and also from amongst professionally qualified persons from other 
occupational groups as well as the private sector. 
 
8. 
Lateral entry.— In order to meet shortages of officers in the Commerce 
and Trade Group or to meet specific requirements, appointments may be made to posts in 
the Group in any grade by recruitment through lateral entry of persons engaged in a 
profession or in the service of a corporation or private organization, who possess such 
professional qualifications and experience as may be prescribed from time to time.  
Similarly, officers of this group may be posted to appropriate posts in corporations and 
private organizations under Government management and control. 
 
9.  
Seniority: **Grades 1 to 16.—Separate Department wise seniority lists 
would be maintained for all posts in **Grades 1 to 16 as hithertofore, on the basis of 
continuous regular officiation in the **grade. 
 
10. 
 Seniority: **Grade 17.—All officers of **Grade 17 will be borne on the 
combined seniority list of the "Commerce and Trade Group". The inter-se seniority of 
direct recruits to **Grade 17 will be determined on the basis of marks obtained at the 
Federal Public Service Commission examination and the assessment during training at 
the Training Institutes/Academies. Those recruited direct on the basis of interview only 
shall reckon their seniority from the date of appointment. The seniority of officers 
promoted to *Grade 17 will be determined with reference to the dates of their regular 
continuous officiation in *Grade 17. As for seniority of direct recruits vis-a-vis promoted 
officers, the direct recruits of a particular year will as a class rank junior to the promoted 
officers of that year. 
 
11. 
 Seniority: *Grade 18 and above.— Seniority will be determined in each 
*grade from the date of regular continuous officiation in the *grade. 
 
12. 
Officers of other occupational groups working in the Departments referred 
to in para above.— Such officers of other groups as may be working in posts now borne 
on the Commerce and Trade Group may be inducted into the Group subject to their 
option and suitability. 
                                                          
* BPS 
 
 Amended vide Establishment Division‘s O.M.No.6/4/2004-CP-II (ML&C) dated 29th October, 2014. 

Page -26                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-2                                                     
 
 
 
13.  Provision for accelerated promotions to posts in Grade 17.— To enable 
bright young persons who have failed to secure, through competitive examination 
conducted by the F.P.S.C., direct entry to *Grade 17 posts, to get another opportunity to 
compete for these posts, or to get accelerated promotion within the Department, the 
following two provisions are made:- 
(a) 
Those of age upto 30 years can appear in the competitive examination 
conducted by the FPSC provided they have put in at least two years 
government service; 
(b) 
There will also be a Departmental Examination under which departmental 
candidates will be considered for promotion to posts in *Grade 17. All 
officials having a minimum of five years Government service in *Grade 
11 and above employed in the Ministry of Commerce, its Attached 
Departments and Subordinate Offices which are included in the 
Commerce and Trade Group, will be eligible to appear in this Examination 
provided they are otherwise eligible.  The upper age limit for this 
examination will be 45 years for the first examination, 40 years for the 
next examination, and 35 years for all subsequent examinations. 
 
14. 
The Secretary, Ministry of Commerce will prepare a scheme for the 
Departmental Examination at (b) above and obtain the approval of Establishment 
Division.  Subject to availability of suitable departmental candidates, promotion on 
accelerated basis through the above examination will be limited to a maximum of 25% of 
the total vacancies and these promotions will be reckoned against the **[promotion 
quota]. 
 
15. 
The existing arrangements with regard to personnel management of the 
―Commerce and Trade Group‖ will continue under the overall supervision of the Ministry 
of Commerce who will prepare gradation lists of all officers in *Grade 17 and above.  
Each department under the Ministry of Commerce will prepare, issue and maintain 
seniority lists of *Grade 16 and below.  The Ministry of Commerce will submit 
periodical reports to the Establishment Secretary.  Any major difficulty which may arise 
in the implementation of these instructions will be resolved in a meeting of the 
Establishment Secretary and the Secretary, Ministry of Commerce. 
[Authority.—Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 6/2/75-ARC, dated 8-5-1975]. 
 
2.2 
Pakistan Customs Service 
 
In pursuance of the Administrative Reforms, it has been decided to constitute 
the "Pakistan Customs Service". The group shall comprise all posts in the Customs and 
Central Excise Department. The overall administration of this group will remain with the 
                                                          
 BPS 
** Subs. vide Estt. Division‘s O.M. No.3/3/86-CP.2 dated 8-9-1987. 
Nomenclature ―Customs and Excise Group‖ renamed as ―Pakistan Customs Service vide Estt. Division‘s 
O.M. No. 4/2/75-ARC dated 12-09-2009. 

CHAPTER-2                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page -27                                                             
 
 
Federal Board of Revenue under the Ministry of Finance. It will function within the 
following broad framework of rules and regulations. 
 
2. 
Grade 1 to *Grade 16.—The existing instructions with regard to direct 
recruitment and promotion quotas, the composition of Departmental Promotion and Selection 
Committees, the appointing authorities for various grades, etc., will continue to apply as 
hithertofore. All posts to be filled by direct recruitment will be advertised except posts in 
*Grade 16 which will be reported to the Federal Public Service Commission. 
            3. 
**Grade 17.— 75% posts in *Grade 17 will be filled through competitive 
examination conducted by the Federal Public Service Commission and 25% through 
promotion. After completion of one year's training at the Academy for Administrative 
Training, the probationer officers allocated to this group will undergo departmental and 
on-the-job training to be followed by an examination. Officers promoted to *Grade 17 
may also be required to undergo such departmental training as the Federal Board of 
Revenue*  may prescribe. 
 
4. 
The following provisions are being made to enable educationally qualified 
persons in *Grade 16 and below to secure entry in *Grade 17:- 
(a) 
They can appear in the competitive examination upto the age of 30 years 
provided they have put in at least 2 years service. A maximum of two 
chances will be allowed after one has entered government service. 
(b) 
There will also be a departmental examination under which departmental 
candidates can be considered for accelerated promotion in their own 
department. The upper age limit for this examination will be 45 years for the 
first examination, 40 years for the next examination, and 35 years for all 
subsequent examinations. 
 
The Federal Board of Revenue** will prepare a scheme for the departmental 
examination at (b) above and obtain the approval of the Ministry of Finance and 
Establishment Division. Subject to availability of suitable departmental candidates, 
promotion on accelerated basis through the above examination will be limited to a 
maximum of 20% of the total vacancies and these promotions will be reckoned against 
the direct recruitment quota. 
 
5. 
**Grade 18 and above.— The procedure for promotion and other matter; 
as laid down in the Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973 
will be observed subject to the length of service as prescribed in Establishment Division 
O.M. No. 3/7/74-AR-II, dated the 29th  May, 1974 namely:— 
 
For **Grade 18........5 years service in *Grade 17. 
 
For **Grade 19.......12 years service in *Grade 17 and above. 
 
For **Grade 20.......15 years service in *Grade 17 and above. 
                                                          
 Revenue Division (Federal Board of Revenue) inserted in the Rules of Business, 1973 (as amended upto 16th 
January, 2007), vide Cab. Div. Notification No. 4-14/98-Min. I. dated 1-12-1998, Schedule II [Rule 3(3) 
Distribution of Business Among the Divisions. 
 BPS. 

Page -28                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-2                                                     
 
 
 
6.   
Secretariat Posts.— Officers of this group will be also eligible for 
Secretariat Posts (Deputy Secretary and above) to which appointment is made through 
examination or by horizontal movement with the approval of the Central Selection Board. 
 
7. 
Lateral entry.— In order to meet shortages of officers in this Group or to 
meet specific requirements, appointments may be made to posts in the Group in any 
*Grade by transfer from other Groups, or by recruitment through lateral entry of persons 
engaged in a profession, or in the service of a corporation or private organisation, who 
possess such professional qualifications and experience as may be prescribed from time 
to time.  Similarly, officers of this Group may be posted to appropriate posts in corporations 
under government management and control. 
 
8. 
Seniority-(i) *Grades 1 to 16.— Seniority lists for all posts in *Grades 1 to 16 
would be maintained as hithertofore on the basis of continuous regular officiation in the 
*Grade. 
 
(ii) 
*Grade 17.— The inter se seniority of direct recruits to **Grade 17 will be 
determined on the basis of order of merit, of probationers determined at the time of final 
passing out from the Academy for Administrative Training. The inter se seniority of the 
promoted officers to *Grade 17 shall be determined according to the date of their regular 
continuous officiation in *Grade 17.  Direct recruits of a particular year, however, shall 
as a batch be placed junior to the officers promoted to *Grade 17 in that year. 
 
(iii)  *Grade 18 and above.—Seniority in each grade will be determined from 
the date of regular continuous officiation in the *grade. 
 
9. 
The existing arrangement with regard to personnel management of the 
Customs and Central Excise Department will continue under the overall supervision of 
the Federal Board of Revenue and the Ministry of Finance. The Federal Board of 
Revenue will prepare gradation list of all officers in *Grade 16 and above.  The lists will 
be prepared Grade-wise.  Each Collector of Customs and Central Excise will prepare, 
issue and maintain seniority lists of *Grade 15 and below. 
 
10. 
The Federal Board of Revenue will submit periodical reports to the 
Establishment Secretary. Any major difficulty which may arise in the implementation of 
these instructions will be resolved in a meeting of Establishment Secretary and the 
Chairman of the Federal Board of Revenue. 
[Authority.-Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 5/2/75-ARC, dated 9-5-1975]. 
 
2.3 
Inland Revenue Service 
 
In pursuance of the Administrative Reforms, it has been decided to constitute the 
"**Inland Revenue Service". The group shall comprise all posts in the Income Tax 
Department. The overall administration of this group will remain with the Federal Board of 
Revenue under the Ministry of Finance. It will function within the following broad framework 
of rules and procedure:— 
                                                          
* BPS 
 ―Income Tax Group‖ renamed as ―Inland Revenue Service‖ vide Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.F.6/2/2009-C.P.II dated 
12-09-2009. 

CHAPTER-2                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page -29                                                             
 
 
 
2. 
*Grades 1 to 16.—The existing instructions with regard to direct 
recruitment and promotion quotas, the composition of Departmental Promotion and 
Selection Committees, the appointing authorities for various *Grades, etc. will continue 
to apply as hithertofore. All posts to be filled by direct recruitment will be advertised 
except posts in Grade 16 which will be reported to the Federal Public Service 
Commission. 
 
3. 
*Grade 17.— 75% of the posts in *Grade 17 will be filled through 
competitive examination conducted by the Federal Public Service Commission and 25% 
through promotion. After completion of one year's training at the Academy for 
Administrative Training, the probationer officers allocated to this group will undergo 
departmental and on-the-job training to be followed by an examination. Officers 
promoted to Grade 17 may also be required to undergo such departmental training as the 
Federal Board of Revenue may prescribe. 
 
4. 
The following provisions are made to enable educationally qualified 
persons in *Grade 16 and below to secure entry in *Grade 17:- 
(a) 
They can appear in the competitive examination upto the age of 30 years 
provided they have put in at least 2 years service. A maximum of two chances 
will be allowed after one has entered Government service. 
(b) 
There will also be a departmental examination under which departmental 
candidates can be considered for accelerated promotion in their own 
department. The upper age limit for this will be 45 years for the first 
examination, 40 years for the next examination and 35 years for 
subsequent examinations. 
 
The Federal Board of Revenue will prepare a scheme for the departmental 
examination at (b) above and obtain the approval of the Ministry of Finance and 
Establishment Division. Subject to availability of suitable departmental candidates, 
promotion on accelerated basis through the above examination will be limited to a 
maximum of 20% of the total vacancies and these promotions will be reckoned against 
the direct recruitment quota. 
 
5. 
*Grade 18 and above.—The procedure for promotion and other matters as 
laid down in the Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973, will 
be observed subject to the length of service as prescribed in Establishment Division O.M. 
No. 3/7/74. AR II, dated the 20th May, 1974, namely:— 
 
For *Grade 18 ..  
5 years service in *Grade 17. 
 
For *Grade 19 ..  
12 years service in *Grade 17 and above. 
 
For *Grade 20 ..  
15 years service in *Grade 17 and above. 
 
6. 
Secretariat Posts.— Officers of this group will be eligible for Secretariat 
posts in **[All Pakistan Unified Grades] in *Grade 19 and above in accordance with the 
procedure prescribed for appointment to Secretariat posts of Deputy Secretary and above. 
                                                          
* BPS 
**All Pakistan Services (Change in Nomenclature) Rules, 1973, notified vide SRO 1307(I)/73 dated 14-09-
1973, have been repealed vide SRO 89(I)/2014 dated 14-02-2014, whereby all notifications and instructions 
issued on the subject from time to time were mutatis mutandis amended. 

Page -30                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-2                                                     
 
 
 
7. 
Lateral Entry.— In order to meet shortages of officers in this group or to 
meet specific requirements, appointments may be made to posts in the Group in any 
*Grade by transfer from other Groups, or by recruitment through lateral entry of persons 
engaged in a profession or in the service of a corporation or private organization, who 
possess such professional qualifications and experience as may be prescribed from time 
to time. Similarly officers of this Group may be posted to appropriate posts in 
corporations and other organizations under Government management and control. 
 
8. 
Seniority.— (i) ٭Grade 1 to 16.— Seniority lists for all posts in Grade 1 to 
16 would be maintained as hithertofore on the basis of continuous regular officiation in 
the Grade. The inter se seniority of direct recruits in *Grade 16 in a particular year will be 
determined in accordance with the merit position obtained by them in the competitive 
examination conducted by the Federal Public Service Commission. 
 
(ii)   *Grade 17.—The inter se seniority of direct recruits in *Grade 17 will be 
determined on the basis of order of merit of the probationers determined at the time of 
final passing out from the Academy for Administrative Training. The inter se seniority of 
officers promoted to *Grade 17 will be determined with reference to the dates of their 
regular continuous officiation in the grade.  As for seniority of direct recruits vis-a-vis 
promoted officers, the direct recruits of a particular year will as a class rank junior to the 
promoted officers of that year. 
 
(iii)  *Grade 18 and above.— Seniority will be determined in each *Grade from 
the date of regular continuous officiation in the *Grade. 
 
9. 
The existing arrangement with regard to personnel management of the 
Income Tax Department will continue under the overall supervision of the Federal Board 
of Revenue and the Ministry of Finance. The Federal Board of Revenue will prepare 
Gradation Lists of all officers in *Grade 16 and above. The lists will be prepared 
Grade-wise. Each Commissioner of Income Tax will prepare, issue and maintain 
seniority lists of *Grade 15 and below. 
 
10. 
The Federal Board of Revenue will submit periodical reports to the 
Establishment Secretary. Any major difficulties which may arise in the implementation of 
these instructions will be resolved in a meeting of the Establishment Secretary and the 
Chairman of the Federal Board of Revenue. 
[Authority.-Estt. Division‘s O.M. No.4/2/75-ARC, dated 09-5-1975]. 
 
2.4 
Tax Administrative Reforms: Reorganization of Federal 
Board of Revenue - Creation of New Occupational Service 
Namely Inland Revenue Service  
 
In terms of S.No.10.2. (i) of Schedule-II of Rules of Business, 1973 and in 
continuation of this Division‘s O.M. No.5/2/75-ARC dated 9-5-1975 and O.M. No. 4/2/75-
ARC dated 9-5-1975, to say that in view of the ongoing Tax Administrative Reforms that 
                                                          
٭BPS. 

CHAPTER-2                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page -31                                                             
 
 
include reorganization of Federal Board of Revenue, it has been decided to create a new 
Occupational Service namely Inland Revenue Service with immediate effect.  
 
2.  
All the business concerning Income Tax, Sales Tax and Federal Excise 
currently being done by the officers and staff of Inland Revenue Service and Pakistan 
Customs Service is transferred to the new Inland Revenue Service. Existing Customs and 
Excise Group will be renamed as Pakistan Customs Service. 
 
3.  
Federal Board of Revenue shall seek from each officer and staff of the 
existing Customs & Excise Group and Income Tax Group an irrevocable option for 
inclusion or otherwise into the new Inland Revenue Service. Such option once exercised 
shall be final. In order to facilitate the officers in this process, FBR shall apprise each 
officer (1) the number of posts which would form part of the new occupational service 
(2) upon option, the seniority in the new service shall count from the date of regular 
appointment in the present post in the existing Customs & Excise Group and Income Tax 
Group in accordance with Civil Servants (Seniority) Rules, 1993, as amended from time 
to time.  
 
4.  
Upon receipt of requisite options. Federal Board of Revenue shall proceed 
as under:-  
(a) 
Scenario-I  
 
In case, some officers from the Pakistan Customs Service and some officers 
from the Inland Revenue Service opt for Inland Revenue Service, the shortage of the 
Inland Revenue Service shall be met by posting of officers of Pakistan Customs Service 
and defunct Inland Revenue under Section 10 of the Civil Servants Act, 1973. Depending 
upon number of options to be exercised by the officers of Pakistan Customs Service and 
Inland Revenue Service, the tentative cadre strength of new Inland Revenue Service and 
Pakistan Customs Service may be as under (i.e. equivalent to existing combined strength 
of the Inland Revenue Service and Pakistan Customs Service):—  
New Inland Revenue Service  
 
Functions  
 
 
Officers  
 
Federal Excise   
 
218  
 
Sales Tax  
 
Inland Revenue Service 
 
978  
 
Total  
 
 
 
1196  
 
Pakistan Customs Service  
Functions  
 
 
 
 
Officers  
Customs  
 
 
 
 
218  

Page -32                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-2                                                     
 
 
 
Upon completion of exercise of options, the exact cadre strength shall be 
finalized by the Establishment Division in consultation with Revenue Division.  
(b) 
Scenario-II  
 
In case all the officers of the Customs and Excise Group and Income Tax Group opt 
for new Service, the Service be renamed as ―Pakistan Revenue Service‖ with common 
seniority and doing all the revenue and tax business. All officers would be part of one cadre. 
The tentative cadre strength of new service may be as under (i.e. equivalent to existing 
combined strength of the Inland Revenue Service and Pakistan Customs Service):—  
 
Functions  
 
 
Officers  
 
Federal Excise   
 
218  
 
Sales Tax  
 
Income Tax  
 
 
978  
 
Customs  
 
 
218  
 
Total  
 
 
 
1414  
 
Upon completion of exercise of options, the exact cadre strength shall be 
finalized by the Establishment Division in consultation with Revenue Division.  
 
5. 
In both the scenarios mentioned in para-4 above, the Income Tax Group 
officers not opting for the new service will remain in the existing Income Tax Group 
which will be a defunct and dying cadre without any future intake.  
 
6. 
The inter-se-seniority of the officers of existing Inland Revenue Service 
and Pakistan Customs Service exercising option for inclusion in the new Pakistan 
Revenue Service or Inland Service, as the case may be, shall count from the date of 
regular appointment in the present post in the existing Customs and Excise Group and 
Income Tax Group in accordance with Civil Servants (Seniority) Rules, 1993, as 
amended from time to time.  
 
7.  
Other measures shall be taken as under:—  
(a) 
All the existing posts currently forming part of Income Tax Group as well 
as those meant for Federal Excise Business but currently forming part of 
Customs and Excise Group shall form part of the new Inland Revenue 
Service with immediate effect. The said posts will, however, be 
transferred to the new Service upon completion of exercise of option.  
(b) 
Further recruitment to the existing Income Tax Group is stopped.  
(c) 
Effective from 2009, fresh recruitment to the newly constituted Inland 
Revenue Service or Pakistan Revenue Service as the case may be, shall be 
initiated through Federal Public Service Commission. 

CHAPTER-2                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page -33                                                             
 
 
 
8.  
Establishment Division‘s O.M. No. 5/2/75-ARC dated 9-5-1975 and O.M. 
No. 4/2/75-ARC dated 9-5-1975 regarding constitution of existing Inland Revenue 
Service and Pakistan Customs Service shall be deemed to have been modified to the 
above extent. In case of inconsistency between the provisions of said O.M.s dated 09-05-
1975 and this O.M., the provisions of this O.M. shall have the overriding effect.  
 
9.  
To overcome the difficulties and interpretation of the methodology an 
Anomaly Committee is constituted comprising Additional Secretary-II, Establishment 
Division, Chairman, Federal Board of Revenue and Additional Secretary, Law and Justice 
Division whose interpretation shall be final subject to approval of Establishment Division. 
 
10.  The Anomaly Committee and all others concerned shall ensure that the 
decisions contained in this O.M. do not create any administrative complications. 
[Authority.—Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. F.6/2/2009-CP-II, dated 12-9-2009]. 
 
2.5 
Pakistan Administrative Service 
 
In continuation of Establishment Division Office Memorandum No. 
1/2/74-ARC, dated the 23rd January, 1974 regarding the formation of the Pakistan Audit 
and Accounts Service, it has been decided with Prime Minister's approval to constitute 
another occupational group called the *Pakistan Administrative Service, comprising field 
posts in the civil administration of the district and the division viz. Commissioner, 
Deputy Commissioner, Additional Deputy Commissioner, Assistant Commissioner and such 
other posts as may be included in the group from time to time. 
 
2.  
The *Pakistan Administrative Service will function within the following 
framework of rules and procedure. These instructions will apply to members of [Omitted] 
and to all other Government servants holding the posts specified in the Schedule of Cadre 
Strength of the Civil Service of Pakistan.  
 
3.  
**Grades 17 to 19: Recruitment to **Grade 17 will continue to be made 
through Federal Public Service Commission as hithertofore except to the extent the posts have 
to be filled through promotion.  Separate orders in this regard will be issued.  After completion 
of integrated training at the Academy for Administrative Training, the probationer officers 
allocated to Pakistan Administrative Service will undergo departmental training as 
hithertofore to be followed by an examination. Promotion to ***Grades 18 and 19 will be 
made by the Central Selection Committee as explained in subsequent paragraphs. 
 
4. 
In view of the importance of the post of DeputyCommissioner which at 
present is a **Grade 18 post carrying special pay, it has been decided as follows:— 
                                                          
 ―District Management Group‖ renamed as ―Pakistan Administrative Service‖ vide Estt. Division‘s 
O.M.No.6/3/2012-CP-II dated 21-05-2012. 
** BPS 
Since abolished, except in the ICT administration & FANA, as a result of devolution plan under the local 
government system introduced in the country. Now District Coordination Officer (DCO) is the principal 
administrative officer. 

Page -34                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-2                                                     
 
 
(i) 
The post of Deputy Commissioner would be a selection post and selection will 
be made from amongst officers having at least 10 years service in police, 
armed forces, civil administration or military lands and Cantonments 
Department. The selected persons shall be given training in administration 
and law, if necessary, before posting as Deputy Commissioner. 
(ii) 
To ensure appointments of experienced persons, the post of Deputy 
Commissioner in major Districts will be placed in Grade 19.  As in other 
groups, for promotion to **Grade 19 a minimum service of 12 years in 
**Grade 17/18 shall be a condition precedent. 
 
5. 
**Grade 20.—Promotion to **Grade 20 shall be made by selection from 
officers of the group who have had at least 15 years of service in **Grades 17-19. 
 
6. 
Secretarial Posts.— As in other occupational groups, officers of this service 
will be eligible for Secretariat appointments in accordance with the procedure already 
prescribed. The officers will be selected, after written tests and interviews, for posts of Deputy 
Secretary and Joint Secretary in the Federal Government and equivalent posts in the 
Provincial Secretariat. These posts will be in a common pool to which officers of all Federal 
and Provincial Departments will be eligible. Those selected for Deputy Secretary and Joint 
Secretary or equivalent posts would be put through a training programme of 3-4 months. 
Their final selection would be made after satisfactory completion of training. No posts of the 
rank of Deputy Secretary and Joint Secretary in the Federal Secretariat, or their equivalent in 
the Provincial Secretariats tenable by officers of [All Pakistan Unified Grades] would be 
filled except from these panels. Relaxation will be made with Prime Minister's approval in 
individual cases. 
 
7.  
**Grades 21-22.—For posts of Additional Secretaries and Secretaries to 
the Federal Government and equivalent posts in the Provincial Governments, selection 
would be made from government servants of various occupational groups in **Grade 20 
and above and also from amongst professionally qualified persons from the private 
sector. 
 
8.   
Lateral entry.— To bring in fresh blood and to relieve shortages, if any, at 
various levels, lateral entry will be resorted to. Lateral entry selections will be made only 
by the Federal Government. 
 
"9. @Seniority.— (i) Seniority inter-se of direct recruits to **Grade 17 appointed 
in a batch to the @@Pakistan Administrative Service on the results of the competitive 
examination held by the FPSC shall be determined on the basis of the order of merit of 
the probationers determined at the time of final passing out from the Academy for 
                                                          
 Directorate of Military Lands & Cantonments; ref. Rules of Business, 1973 as amended upto 16th January, 
2007, rule 4(4), Schedule-III. 
 BPS 
All Pakistan Services (Change in Nomenclature) Rules, 1973, notified vide SRO 1307(I)/73 dated 14-09-
1973, have been repealed vide SRO 89(I)/2014 dated 14-02-2014, whereby all notifications and instructions 
issued on the subject from time to time were mutatis mutandis amended. 
@Subs.vide Estt. Division O.M. No. 2/2/74-ARC, dated 14-12-1976. This amendment takes effect from the date of 
issuance of Estt. Division O.M.No.2/2/74-ARC, dated 23-2-1974. 
@@―District Management Group‖ renamed as ―Pakistan Administrative Service‖ vide Estt. Division‘s 
O.M.No.6/3/2012-CP-II dated 21-05-2012. 

CHAPTER-2                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page -35                                                             
 
 
Administrative Training. Seniority of direct recruits to Grade 17 appointed otherwise 
than through the competitive examination held by the FPSC shall be determined on the 
basis of the date of continuous regular officiation in that *grade in the Pakistan 
Administrative Service. If the date of continuous regular officiation is the same, the older 
in age shall rank senior. 
 
(ii) 
Seniority in *Grade 18 and above shall be determined on the basis of the 
date of continuous regular officiation in the *grade provided that those who are selected 
for promotion to a higher grade in one batch shall, on their promotion to the higher grade 
retain their inter-se-seniority as in the lower grade. 
 
(iii) Gradation list of officers in **[All Pakistan Unified Grades] would be issued 
by the Establishment Division periodically." 
 
10. 
Under Article 240 of the Constitution, appointments to and conditions of 
service of persons in the All-Pakistan Services are to be determined by the Federal 
Government. The concept of All-Pakistan Services has been retained in the Constitution 
with a broader national purpose, viz. national integration and cohesion. It is, therefore, 
emphasized that all matters pertaining to the appointment, promotion, transfer, etc. of 
members of the [All Pakistan Unified Grades] are the responsibility of Federal 
Government. 
 
11. 
In the past, substantive appointments to posts in *Grade 18 were made on the 
recommendations of the Federal Public Service Commission by the Federal Government after 
consulting the Provinces concerned. This procedure was, however, reduced to a mere 
formality as the Provinces who were permitted to make officiating appointments on 
temporary basis continued such appointments without interruption. For appointments to 
*Grades above 18, no reference to Federal Public Service Commission was necessary; in their 
case recommendations were made by the Provinces to the Federal Government and with their 
approval promotions were made. While making officiating appointments or making 
recommendations for promotions, the Provinces usually considered only those Government 
servants who were working within their jurisdiction. The cases of senior persons with good 
record of service working at the Centre or in other Provinces were generally not considered 
by the Provinces. This procedure now requires modification for various reasons. Firstly, under 
the revised procedure consultation with Federal Public Service Commission in the matter of 
substantive promotion to *Grade 18 is no longer necessary and, therefore, distinction between 
officiating and substantive appointments is no longer valid. Secondly, as a result of the 
introduction of the administrative reforms a number of officers from other services have been 
inducted into All Pakistan Services. It is, therefore, necessary that their claim for promotion 
should also be fully taken into account before making appointments to higher *Grades. 
 
12. 
It has, therefore, been decided that: 
                                                          
 BPS 
 All Pakistan Services (Change in Nomenclature) Rules, 1973, notified vide SRO 1307(I)/73 dated 14-09-
1973, have been repealed vide SRO 89(I)/2014 dated 14-02-2014, whereby all notifications and instructions 
issued on the subject from time to time were mutatis mutandis amended. 
 Federal Government. 

Page -36                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-2                                                     
 
 
(i) 
A Central Selection Committee under the Establishment Secretary in 
which Chief Secretaries of the Provinces would be associated would make 
recommendations for promotion to 
Grade 18 and above. For 
appointments in the Provinces, the cases will be first submitted to 
Governor/Chief Minister as at present before submitting the cases to the 
Prime Minister for approval. Instead of making recommendations in each 
case of promotion, panels of names for promotion to higher *Grades 
would be prepared periodically so that whenever vacancies have to be 
filled at short notice, action would be taken without any delay. 
(ii) 
No officer above a certain seniority should remain in the same Province 
for a period of more than 5 years.  The Central Selection Committee 
referred to above will look into the implementation of this decision. 
[Authority.-Establishment Division‘s O.M. No. 2/2/74-ARC, dated 23-2-1974 as amended vide 
Establishment Division‘s O.M. of even number dated 14-12-1976]. 
 
 
2.6 
Classification of Districts 
 
 
The Federal Government in pursuance of para 4 (ii) of the Establishment 
Division O.M. No. 2/2/74-ARC. II, dated the 23rd February,1975 agree to the classification 
of the following districts as major districts and placing of posts of Deputy Commissioner of 
these districts in BPS 19:— 
 
Sl.  # 
Punjab 
 
Sindh 
Sl.  # K.P.K 
 
Balochistan 
1. 
Lahore 
1. 
Karachi 
1. 
Peshawar 
1. 
Quetta 
2. 
Rawalpindi 
2. 
Hyderabad 
2. 
D.I. Khan 
2. 
Zhob 
3. 
Multan 
3. 
Sukkur 
3. 
Swat 
3. 
Nasirabad 
4. 
Bahawalpur 
4. 
Larkana 
4. 
Abbottabad 
4. 
Mekran 
5. 
Sahiwal 
 
 
 
 
5. 
Khuzdar 
6. 
Gujranwala 
 
 
 
 
6. 
Kohlu 
7. 
Sargodha 
 
 
 
 
7. 
Loralai 
8. 
Faisalabad 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Placement of the posts in BPS 19 does not imply automatic @upgradation of the 
incumbent of the posts. The Provincial Government will refer the case of promotion to 
BPS 19 against these posts to the Establishment Division in accordance with the normal 
procedure. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s Additional Secretary's d.o. letter No.3/16/ 74-ARC-II,  
dated the 30-8-1975 addressed to Provincial Governments]. 
                                                          
 BPS 
 See Rotation Policy. 
 Also see Rotation Policy for PAS/PSP officers. 
@ For instructions/orders on upgradation. 

CHAPTER-2                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page -37                                                             
 
 
 
2.7 
Economists and Planners Group 
 
In pursuance of the Administrative Reforms, it has been decided to constitute 
another occupational group to be called "Economists and Planners Group" comprising all 
posts of Economists, Chief, Deputy Chief, Assistant Chief, Research Officers, Planning 
Officers and Economic Investigators in the Economic Sections of the Planning Division, 
Economic Affair Division and Finance Division and posts in other Ministries, Divisions and 
Departments of the Federal Government dealing exclusively with economic matters and 
planning and development in the economic field. For this purpose the Ministries and 
Divisions concerned shall communicate to the Planning and Development Division the 
number and Grades of all such posts under their administrative control, together with a 
nominal roll of the incumbents of these posts showing dates of their regular appointment in 
their present *Grades. Based on the information supplied by the Ministries and Divisions, the 
Planning and Development Division shall prepare a schedule of posts to be included in the 
Economists and Planners Group and forward it to the Establishment Division for approval. 
 
2.  
The Economists and Planners Group will be under the administrative 
control of the Planning and Development Division, and will function within the following 
broad framework of rules. 
 
3. 
*Grades1- 16.— Each Ministry/Division/Department will operate these posts 
separately as heretofore subject to the overall supervision of the Planning and Development 
Division. The existing rules, regulations and instructions in regard to direct recruitment, 
promotion quotas, composition of Promotion and Selection Committee, appointing authorities 
for various *grades etc. will continue to apply as heretofore. The provisions of recruitment 
rules already framed for various categories of posts with the approval of the Establishment 
Division will also continue to apply.  All posts to be filled by direct recruitment will be 
advertised. 
 
4. 
*Grade 17.— Initial entry to *grade 17 will be made from amongst such 
probationers, recruited through the competitive examination conducted by the Federal 
Public Service Commission, as are in possession of the prescribed academic 
qualifications.  After the initial institutional training, the probationers officers will be 
given such departmental training as may be prescribed, to be followed by an examination 
the details of which will be prepared by the Planning and Development Division.  
Thereafter, they will be allocated to various posts in different Ministries/ Divisions/ 
Departments. They will ordinarily remain in the Ministries/ Divisions/Departments of 
their original posting until they get promotion to the next higher *grade. With the 
exception of very special cases, there will be no horizontal movement at this stage from 
one Ministry/Division/ Department to the other. 
 
5.  
75% of posts in *grade 17 will be filled by direct recruitment and 25% 
through promotion on the basis of selection. 
 
6. 
*Grade 18 and above.—33% posts in *grades 18, 19 & 20 would be filled 
by promotion if suitably qualified and experienced persons are available. The remaining 
67% would be filled by direct recruitment, or transfer, of persons possessing such 
                                                          
 BPS. 

Page -38                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-2                                                     
 
 
qualifications and experience as may be prescribed. Direct recruitment will be made 
through the Federal Public Service Commission. 
 
7. 
All posts in *grade 17 and above will be selection posts. 
 
8. 
The procedure for promotion and other matters as laid down in the Civil 
Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973 will be observed. 
 
9. 
Officers of this group will be eligible for appointment to equivalent posts 
in the Secretariat and other Groups by horizontal movement, and to posts in higher 
*grades in the Secretariat Group in accordance with the prescribed procedure. 
 
10. 
Lateral entry.—In order to meet existing deficiency in *grades 17 and 18, 
the Planning and Development Division will prepare a scheme for recruitment of young 
economists possessing Master's Degree in Economics and for their training in Pakistan 
and abroad (in Ph.D. Fellowships etc.) and submit it to the Establishment Division for 
approval. 
 
11. 
To meet specific requirements, appointments may also be made to posts in 
the Group in any grade by recruitment through lateral entry of persons either in 
Government service, or engaged in a profession or in the service of a corporation, or 
private organization, who possess professional qualifications and experience as may be 
prescribed for the posts from time to time.  Similarly, officers of the Economists and 
Planners Group may be posted to appropriate posts in corporations and public sector 
organizations under government management and control. 
 
12. Seniority.—Grade 1 to 16.— Separate Division-wise/ Department-wise 
seniority lists would be maintained for all posts in *grades 1 to 16 as hithertofore. The 
seniority as already determined in various grades under the previous rules before the 
promulgation of the Civil Servants Ordinance, 1973, i.e. before 15th August, 1973, shall 
not be disturbed. However, seniority of persons promoted to higher grades on or after 15th 
August, 1973 shall be determined on the basis of the date of regular appointment to the grade, 
provided the persons who are selected for promotion to a higher *grade in one batch shall, on 
their promotion to the higher *grade, retain their inter-se-seniority in the lower *grade. 
 
13. 
*Grade 17.— All officers of *grade 17 will be borne on a combined 
seniority list of the "Economists and Planners Group".  The inter-se-seniority of the direct 
recruits to *grade 17 will be determined on the basis of the order of merit of the 
probationers determined on the conclusion of training. The inter se seniority of officers 
promoted to *grade 17 will be determined with reference to the dates of their regular 
appointment in *grade 17 provided that officers who are selected for promotion to that 
grade in one batch shall, on their promotion, retain their inter-se-seniority in the lower 
grade as for seniority of direct recruits vis-a-vis promoted officers, the direct recruits 
appointed in a particular year will, as a class, rank junior to the officers appointed by 
promotion on regular basis in that year. 
                                                          
 BPS. 

CHAPTER-2                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page -39                                                             
 
 
 
14. 
*Grade 18 and above.— Seniority will be determined in each grade from 
the date of regular appointment to the *grade provided that officers who are selected for 
promotion to higher grade in one batch shall, on their promotion to a higher *grade, 
retain their inter-se-seniority in the lower *grade. Those appointed by direct recruitment, 
if more than one person is selected in one batch, shall be assigned seniority in accordance 
with the order of merit determined at the time of selection provided the selected persons 
join within the prescribed time. 
 
15. 
 Provision for accelerated promotion of posts in *grade 17.— To enable 
bright young persons in the Group who fail to secure direct entry to *Grade 17 posts 
through the Federal Public Service Commission to get another opportunity to compete for 
these posts or to  get  accelerated promotion to *Grade 17 within the department, the 
following provisions are made:- 
(a) 
Officials of age upto 30 years can appear in the competitive examination 
conducted by the Federal Public Service Commission provided they have 
put in at least two years Government Service.  Not more than two chances 
will be allowed after one has entered government service; 
(b) 
There will also be a departmental examination for departmental candidates 
for accelerated promotion to posts in *Grade 17. Subject to possession of 
such minimum qualifications as may be prescribed, all officials having a 
minimum of 5 years government service in *Grade 11 and above in the 
Group will be entitled to appear in this examination. The upper age limit 
for this examination will be 45 years for the first examination, 40 years for 
the next examination and 35 years for subsequent examinations. 
 
16.  The Secretary, Planning and Development Division will prepare a scheme 
for departmental examination mentioned in para 15 and obtain the approval of the 
Establishment Division.  Promotion on accelerated basis through the above examination 
will, subject to availability of suitable departmental candidates, be limited to the 
maximum of 25% of the total vacancies in *Grade 17 and these promotions will be 
reckoned against the direct recruitment quota. 
 
17.  The existing arrangements with regard to personnel management of 
various posts and cadres in the "Economists and Planners Group" will continue but the 
Secretary, Planning and Development Division in liaison with the Ministry/Division/ 
Department concerned will be responsible for the smooth implementation of the above 
instructions. He will prepare *grade-wise gradation list of all officers in Grade-17 and 
above. Any major difficulties which may arise in the implementation of these instructions 
will be resolved in a meeting of the Establishment Secretary, the Secretary Planning & 
Development Division and such other Secretary or Secretaries as may be co-opted. 
[Authority.-Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.10/2/75-ARC, dated 25-3-1976]. 
                                                          
 BPS. 

Page -40                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-2                                                     
 
 
 
2.8 
Foreign* Service of Pakistan 
 
In continuation of Establishment Division Office Memorandum No. 
1/2/74-ARC, dated the 23rd January, 1974, it has been decided with the Prime Minister's 
approval to constitute another occupational group called the "Foreign Affairs Group" 
comprising all posts in or under the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  The group will be under 
the administrative control of the Foreign Ministry and will function within the following 
framework of procedure, rules and regulations etc. 
 
2. 
Grade 1-16.— These comprise posts of Peons, Daftries, Clerks, 
Assistants, @Stenographers and Office Superintendents. Recruitment will be partly by 
promotion and partly direct recruitment in accordance with the Civil Servants 
(Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973. As provided in the rules, where 
appointments are to be made from outside, the posts will be advertised. 
 
3. 
***Grade 17.— Initial entry to ***Grade 17 in the **Foreign Affairs 
Group will continue to be made as at present through competitive examination conducted 
by Federal Public Service Commission. On completion of one year's training at the 
Academy for Administrative Training@@, suitable candidates would be allocated to 
**Foreign Affairs Group on the basis of their ability and aptitude.  Thereafter, they would 
be given departmental or on-the-job training in such a manner that they are exposed to 
Commercial, Press etc., as well as Diplomatic work. 
 
4. 
As in the case of @@@Accounts Group, the following two provisions are 
being made to enable educationally qualified persons in ***Grade 16 and below to secure 
entry in ***Grade 17. 
(a) 
They can appear in the competitive examination conducted by F.P.S.C. 
upto the age of 30 years provided they have put in at least 2 years services. 
(b) 
There will be a departmental examination under which departmental 
candidates would be considered for promotion to ***Grade 17. The age limit 
for this examination will be 35 years. Such departmental examination will be 
held by FPSC. Those promoted ***Grade 17 will be initially appointed as 
Section Officers at Headquarters. After training and a spell of duty at 
Headquarters they would be eligible for posting abroad. 
 
5. ***Grade 18.—Promotion to ***Grade 18 will be from amongst government 
servants of Grade 17 who have rendered at least 5 years of service in that *Grade. 
 
6.  
***Grades 19 and 20.— The existing procedure governing promotions to 
these Grades would, by and large, remain the same.  As in the case of Secretariat 
                                                          
* The nomenclature of Foreign Affairs Groups was changed to ‗Foreign Service of Pakistan‘ vide Estt. Div.‘s 
Notification No. SRO 936(1)/83, dated 29-9-1983. 
 Foreign Service of Pakistan. 
 BPS 
@Now Assistant Private Secretary. 
@@ Civil Service Academy. 
@@@ Now Pakistan Audit and Accounts Service. 

CHAPTER-2                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page -41                                                             
 
 
Officers, promotion to Grade 20 will be on the basis of written test and as well as 
Annual Confidential Reports. The minimum length of service for promotion to *Grade 
19 and 20 will respectively be 12 years and 15 years in *Grade 17 and above. 
 
7. 
*Grades 21 and 22.— Selection will be made from Government servants 
in *Grades 20 and above. 
 
8. 
Transfer of officers from other Ministries............... 
 
9.  
Lateral entry.— In view of our expanding requirements to man posts 
abroad and the need for greater circulation of officers of the Foreign Affairs Group to 
other Ministries, the cadre strength of the ***Foreign Affairs Group will be kept 
constantly under review and lateral entry resorted to whenever and in whichever *Grade 
there is shortage. But apart from the need to meet such shortages, there would be regular 
lateral entry each year at 1st Secretary/ Director and Minister/Director General levels for 
continuous enrichment of the ***Foreign Affairs Group by induction of fresh blood from 
the private sector as well as other occupational groups. For the next few years the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs would submit a report every three months as to how the 
lateral system is working. On this report, the comments of the Establishment Division 
would be obtained before submission to the Prime Minister. 
 
10. 
Exposure to other Ministries.— In order to equip them better for 
diplomatic work officers of the ***Foreign Affairs Group, in the course of their 
assignment in Pakistan, would be exposed to the work relating to Trade and Commerce, 
Planning, Public Relations and Publicity and Economic matters. They would be posted, 
on short term secondments, to Ministries/Organisations/ Corporations etc. dealing with 
these and allied subjects.  
 
11. 
 Secretariat Officers working in Foreign Office.— There are at present a 
large number of *Grade 17 and *Grade 18 officers belonging to the former Central 
Secretariat Service who are working in the Foreign Ministry and in Missions abroad. 
Some of them who are suitable would be permanently inducted into the *Foreign Affairs 
Group and the rest would be withdrawn in a phased programme. 
 
12. 
 Personnel Wing of the Foreign Ministry.— The two top posts in the 
Personnel Wing of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs will be manned by officers, not 
belonging to ***Foreign Affairs Group. 
 
13. 
Seniority etc.— A Unified Gradation List of officers of the ***Foreign 
Affairs Group will be prepared by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, taking into account the 
above decisions and in accordance with the principles already adopted for other groups 
viz-the seniority in each *Grade will be determined from the date of appointment to that 
*Grade. The strict application of this rule may create hardship in certain cases as for 
example some Section Officers of former CSS cadre are in *Grade 18 while most of the 
                                                          
 BPS 
 Now Performance Evaluation Reports(PERs). 
 Foreign Service of Pakistan. 

Page -42                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-2                                                     
 
 
Directors are also in Grade 18.  Such anomalies have to be removed.  To do this and to 
resolve any major difficulty that may arise as a result of the application of these 
instructions in regard to seniority a committee has been set up consisting of the Foreign 
Secretary (Administration) and Establishment Secretary. 
[Authority.-Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 3/2/74-ARC, dated 8-4-1974, as amended vide  
O.M. of even numbers dated 21-9-1976, 30-1-1978 and 28-2-1978]. 
 
2.9 
Information Group 
 
In pursuance of the Administrative Reforms, it has been decided to constitute 
another occupational group to be called "Information Group" which shall comprise all 
posts in the following Departments and Organizations and such posts in the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting as may be specifically included in the Group:- 
(i) 
Press Information Department and its Regional Information Offices. 
 (ii) Directorate of Research and Reference. 
(iii) External Publicity Wing and its Offices in Pakistan Missions abroad. 
(iv) Border Publicity Organization and its Regional Offices. 
(v) 
Audit Bureau of Circulation and its Regional Offices. 
(vi) Directorate of Economic Publicity. 
(vii) Directorate of Films and Publications. 
 
The group will be under the administrative control of the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting and will function within the following broad framework of 
rules and procedure. 
 
2. 
The posts in *Grade 17 and above included in the Information Group are 
detailed in the enclosed schedule (Annex). The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
may, after consultation with the Establishment Division, add to, or remove any post from 
the Schedule. In addition, there will be a leave, training and deputation reserve as 
follows:- 
 
(1)  Leave Reserve....10% of the duty posts. 
 
(2)  Training and Deputation reserve....10% of the duty posts. 
 
3. 
BPS 1 to 16.— Each Department and Organization will operate these 
posts as hithertofore. The existing instructions with regard to direct recruitment and 
promotion quotas, the composition of Promotion and Selection Committees, the 
Appointing Authorities for various *Grades, etc., will continue to apply.  All posts to be 
filled by direct recruitment will be advertised, except posts in BPS 16 which will be 
reported to the Federal Public Service Commission. 
 
4. 
BPS 17.— Seventy-five per cent posts in BPS 17 will be filled through 
competitive examination conducted by the Federal Public Service Commission. After 
completion of training at the Academy for Administrative Training, the probationer officers 
                                                          
 BPS 

CHAPTER-2                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page -43                                                             
 
 
allocated to the Information Group will undergo on-the-job departmental training to be 
followed by an examination prescribed by Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 
 
5. 
The remaining 25% posts will be filled by promotion on the basis of 
selection from amongst BPS 16 Officers of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
and the Departments and Organizations included in the group.  
 
6. 
BPS 18 and above.— The posts will be filled by promotion on the basis of 
selection from amongst eligible officers of the group in accordance with the procedure 
laid down in the Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973 and 
other instructions issued from time to time, or if no candidate is considered suitable from 
within the group by horizontal movement of suitably qualified and experienced officers 
from other groups. Government instructions regarding minimum length of service for 
eligibility for promotion to BPS 18, 19 and 20 will be observed. 
 
7. 
Eligibility for senior posts in the Secretariat.— Officers of this group will 
be eligible for Secretariat posts i.e. Deputy Secretary and Joint Secretary, by horizontal 
movement, as well as by lateral entry through examination etc. 
 
8. 
Lateral entry.— In order to meet shortage of officers in the group or to 
meet specific requirements, appointment may be made in posts in the group in any BPS, 
by transfer from other groups or by recruitment through lateral entry of persons either in 
Government service or engaged in a profession or in the service of a corporation or 
private organization, who possess such professional qualifications and experience as may 
be prescribed from time to time. Such appointments shall be made through Federal Public 
Service Commission in consultation with the Establishment Division. 
 
9. 
 Seniority: (a) BPS 1 to 16.— In respect of BPS 1 to 16, separate seniority 
lists would be maintained for each Department and Organization included in the 
Information Group, as hithertofore, on the basis of continuous regular officiation in the 
Grade. 
 
(b) 
BPS 17.— All officers of BPS 17 will be borne on a combined seniority 
list of the "Information Group". The inter-se-seniority of the direct recruits to BPS 17 
will be determined on the basis of the order of merit of the probationers determined on 
the conclusion of training. The inter-se-seniority of officers promoted to BPS 17 will be 
determined with reference to the dates of their regular appointment in BPS 17 provided 
that officers who are selected for promotion to that Grade in one batch shall, on their 
promotion, retain their inter-se-seniority in the lower BPS. As for seniority of direct 
recruits viz-a-viz promoted officers, the direct recruits appointed in a particular year will, as a 
class, rank junior to the officers appointed by promotion on regular basis in that year. 
 
(c) 
BPS 18 and above.— Seniority will be determined in each BPS from the 
date of regular appointment to the BPS; provided that officers who are selected for 
promotion to higher BPS in one batch shall, on their promotion to a higher BPS, retain 
their inter-se-seniority in the lower BPS. Those appointed by direct recruitment, if more 
than one person is selected in one batch, shall be assigned seniority in accordance with 
the order of merit determined at the time of selection provided the selected persons join 
within the prescribed time. 

Page -44                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-2                                                     
 
 
 
Note.—The seniority as already determined in various BPS under the rules in 
force before the promulgation of the Civil Servants Ordinance, 1973 i.e. before 
15-8-1973, shall not, as far as possible be disturbed. However, seniority of persons 
promoted to higher BPS on or after 15-8-73 shall be determined on the basis of the date 
of regular appointment to the Grade, provided that the persons who are selected for 
promotion to a higher Grade in one batch shall, on their promotion to the higher BPS, 
retain their inter-se-seniority in the lower BPS. 
 
10. 
 Provision for accelerated promotion to posts in BPS 17.— To enable 
bright young persons who have failed to secure through competitive examination 
conducted by Federal Public Service Commission direct entry to BPS 17 posts, or to get  
accelerated promotion within the Department, the following two provisions are made:- 
(a) 
Those of age upto 30 years can appear in the competitive examination 
conducted by the Federal Public Service Commission provided they have put 
in at least 2 years service. 
(b) 
There will also be a departmental examination under which departmental 
candidates will be considered for promotion to posts in BPS 17.  All 
officials having a minimum of 5 years service in BPS 11 and above in the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and the departments and 
organizations, which are included in the Information Group, will be eligible to 
appear in this examination, provided they fulfill the prescribed conditions. The 
upper age limit for this examination will be 45 years for the first examination, 
40 years for the next examination and 35 years for all subsequent 
examinations. 
 
The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting will prepare a scheme for the 
departmental examination at (b) above and obtain the approval of Establishment Division. 
Subject to availability of suitable departmental candidates, promotion on accelerated basis 
through the above examination will be limited to a maximum of 25% of the total vacancies 
and these promotions will be reckoned against the direct recruitment quota. 
 
11. 
 The existing arrangements with regard to personnel management will 
continue under the overall supervision of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
who will prepare gradation lists of all officers in BPS 17 and above.  Each Department 
under the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting included in the group will prepare, 
issue and maintain seniority lists in respect of BPS 16 and above. 
 
12. 
 The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting will submit periodical 
reports to the Establishment Secretary.  Any major difficulties which may arise in the 
implementation of these instructions will be resolved in a meeting of the Establishment 
Secretary and the Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 
[Authority.-Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 2/8/75-ARC, dated 17-6-1977]. 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-2                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page -45                                                             
 
 
(ANNEX) 
 
SCHEDULE SHOWING POSTS IN BPS 17 AND 
ABOVE INCLUDED IN THE INFORMATION GROUP 
 
WING/ 
NOMENCLATURE 
BPS  
NO. OF   
DEPARTMENT 
OF POST 
 
POSTS 
   1                                            2                
3   
4           
1. Audit Bureau of 
Director            
19          
 
1 
 
 Circulation,   
Deputy Director     
18          
 
1 
 
 (Headquarters,  
Assistant Director  
17          
 
1 
 
 Islamabad) 
 
 Audit Bureau of  
Assistant Directors   
17      
 
4 
 
 Circulation, 
 
 
 
 
 (Lahore/Karachi/    
 
Total:   
 
7 
 
 
 Peshawar/Quetta).                        
 
 
 
2. External Publicity 
Director General     
21         
 
1      
 
Wing, Islamabad. 
Minister (Information) 
20         
 
2 
 
(London/New Delhi) 
 
  
Directors 
19         
 
4 
 
  
Press Counselors  
19         
 
8 
 
  
(Bonn, Cairo, Dhaka, 
 
  
New York, Paris, Riyadh, 
 
  
Tehran, Washington) 
 
  
Deputy Directors     
18         
 
6 
 
  
Press Attaches  
18        
 
17  
 
(Abu Dhabi, Colombo, 
 
  
Canberra, Beijing, 
 
  
 
Ankara, Jeddah, 
 
  
 
Kuala-Lumpur,Kuwait 
 
  
London, New Delhi, 
  
 
Nairobi, Ottawa, Rome, 
 
 
 
Tokyo,Hong Kong,  
 
 
 
Jakarta, Washington) 
 
 
 
Assistant Directors  
17        
 
7                         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total: 
 
45    
 
3. Internal Publicity   
Director General     
20        
 
1 
 
 
 
 
Directors       
19        
 
3 
 
 
 
 
Deputy Directors    
18        
 
2 
 
 
 
 
Assistant Directors  
17        
 
3 
 
 
 
 
 
    Total: 
           9 
 
 
4.  Information         
Director General     
20        
 
1 
    Service Academy     
Directors            
19        
 
2 
 
  
  
 
 
Deputy Directors     
18        
 
3 
  
  
 
 
 
Total : 
 
6 
 
                                                          
 Subs.vide Ministry of Information and Media Development (now M/o Information and Broadcasting) O.M. No. 
1(5)/92-IC, dated 24-7-1993. 

Page -46                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-2                                                     
 
 
5.  Press Information   
Director General     
21        
1 
    Department          
Dy. Directors Genl.   
20        
2 
    (Headquarters),     
Directors            
19        
7 
    Islamabad.          
Deputy Directors     
18       
12 
 
  
 
 
Assistant Directors/ 
17    
32 
 
  
 
 
Information Officers 
    PID (Regional       
Director             
19        
1  
    Information         
Deputy Directors      
18        
3 
    Office), Lahore 
 
    PID (Sub-Office)    
Deputy Directors      
18     
2 
    Multan/Faisalabad   
Information Officers   
17   
2 
 
    PID (Regional       
Assistant Directors/  
17  
5 
    Information         
Information Officers                    
 
 
    Office) Lahore  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Total: 
67  
     PID (Regional       
Director             
19 
1 
    Information         
Deputy Directors      
18   
2 
    Office) Karachi     
 
    PID (Sub-Office)    
Deputy Director      
18 
1 
    Hyderabad           
Information Officer  
17 
1 
 
    PID (Regional       
Information Officers/ 
17  
6 
    Information         
Assistant Directors 
    Office)Karachi                                           
   Total:  
11    
  
 
 
 
 
 
   PID (Regional       
Director             
19  
1 
    Information         
Deputy Directors      
18  
2 
    Office)             
Research Officer     
17 
1 
    Peshawar            
Information Officers  
17 
2 
    PID (Sub-           
Information Officer   
17 
1 
    Office) D.I. Khan                                                                        
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Total:  
7  
    PID (Regional       
Director             
19 
1 
    Information         
Deputy Directors      
18 
2 
    Office) Quetta     
Information Officers  
17 
2                 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Total: 
5  
    PID (Regional       
Deputy Director     
18 
1 
    Information Office)  
Information Officer  
17 
1 
    Gilgit PID (Sub-Office)    
 Chilas 
 
Information Officer   
17       
1 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Total:  
3  

CHAPTER-2                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page -47                                                             
 
 
6.  Directorate of      
Director General      
20 
1 
    Films and           
Directors                 
19 
2 
    Publications       
Deputy Directors      
18 
2  
    (Headquarters)Ibd. 
    DFP (Lahore         
Deputy Director       
18       
1 
    Office) Directorate of              Assistant Directors   17 
2 
    Films and Publications 
Assistant Directors    
17 
4 
   (Headquarters)Ibd. 
 
  
 
 
 
Total:  
12 
7.  Directorate General 
Director General   
20  
1 
    (Research and          
Directors          
19       
3 
    Reference) Ibd.        
Deputy Directors    
18  
9 
 
  
 
 
Assistant Directors 
17 
11 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Total:  
24  
 
8.  Central Zakat  
Deputy Director    
18 
1 
    Administration  
(To be paid by 
    Finance Div., Ibd.             Central Zakat 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Administration)  
Total: 
 1 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
»Grand Total: 
   197197 
 
(Besides there will be 10% deputation reserve and 10% leave reserve in each pay scale). 
 
2.10 
Military Lands and Cantonments Group 
 
In pursuance of the Administrative Reforms, it has been decided to form another 
Occupational Group to be called "Military Lands and Cantonments Group". The Group 
shall comprise all posts in the Military Lands and Cantonments Department and such 
posts as may be included in the group from time to time. 
 
2. 
The Group will be under the administrative control of the Ministry of 
Defence and will function within the following broad framework of rules and procedure. 
 
3. 
BPS 1 to 16.— The existing instructions with regard to direct recruitment 
and promotion quotas, the composition of Departmental Promotion and Selection 
Committees, the appointing authorities for various BPS, etc. will continue to apply.  The 
provisions of recruitment rules already framed for various categories of posts with the 
approval of Establishment Division will also continue to apply.  All posts to be filled by 
direct recruitment will be advertised except posts in BPS 16 which will be reported to the 
Federal Public Service Commission. 
 
4. 
BPS 17.— Seventy five percent (75%) posts in BPS 17 will be filled 
through Competitive Examination to be conducted by the Federal Public Service 
Commission and 25% by promotion from amongst the departmental incumbents holding 
posts in BPS 11 and above. After completion of integrated training at the Academy for 
Administrative Training, the probationer officers allocated to the "Military Lands and 
Cantonments Group " will undergo common Departmental Training to be followed by a 
Departmental Examination, the details of which will be worked out by the Secretary, 
Ministry of Defence in consultation with this Division and the Federal Public Service 
Commission. Thereafter, they will be allocated to various posts in the Group. 

Page -48                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-2                                                     
 
 
 
[5. BPS 18 and above.— Posts will be filled by promotion or direct 
recruitment in accordance with the procedure laid down in the Civil Servants 
(Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973 and other instructions issued from 
time to time or by horizontal movement of suitably qualified and experienced officer 
from other Groups. In case of appointment of Director General ML & C, the Prime 
Minister may appoint any officer of the corresponding rank/grade and having 
required/special expertise and experience on secondment.] 
 
6. 
Eligibility for posts in the Secretariat.— Officers of the Military Lands 
and Cantonments Group will be eligible for Secretariat posts i.e. Deputy Secretary and 
Joint Secretary, by horizontal movement as well as by lateral entry through examination 
etc. 
 
7. 
Eligibility for posts in the Pakistan Administrative Service.— Officers of 
the Military Lands and Cantonments Group will also be eligible for induction in the 
Pakistan Administrative Service on the basis of selection in accordance with a procedure 
that may be prescribed from time to time. 
 
8. 
Lateral Entry.— In order to meet shortages of officers in the Military 
Lands and Cantonments Group or to meet specific requirements, appointments may be 
made to posts in the Group in any BPS by transfer from other Groups, or by recruitment 
through lateral entry of persons engaged in a profession or in the service of a corporation 
or private organization, who possess such professional qualifications and experience as 
may be prescribed from time to time. 
 
9. 
 Seniority.— (i) BPS 1 to 16.— Separate seniority lists would be 
maintained for all posts in BPS 1 to 16 as hithertofore on the basis of continuous regular 
officiation in the BPS. 
 
(ii)  BPS 17.— All officers of BPS 17 will be borne on the combined seniority 
list of the Military Lands and Cantonments Group.  The inter-se-seniority of direct 
recruits to BPS 17 will be determined on the basis of order of merit of probationers 
determined at the time of final passing out from the Academy for Administrative 
Training. The inter-se-seniority of officers promoted to BPS 17 will be determined with 
reference to the dates of their regular continuous officiation in BPS 17. As for seniority of 
direct recruits viz-a-viz promoted officers, the direct recruits of a particular year will, as a 
class, rank junior to the officers promoted to BPS 17 in that year. 
 
(iii)  BPS 18 and above.—Seniority in each BPS will be determined from the 
date of regular continuous officiation in the Grade. 
 
10. 
 Provision for accelerated promotion to posts in BPS 17.—To enable 
bright young persons who have failed to secure direct entry to BPS 17 posts through 
Competitive Examination conducted by the Federal Public Service Commission to get 
another opportunity to compete for these posts or to get accelerated promotion within the 
department, the following two provisions are made:— 
(a) 
Those of age upto 30 years can appear in the Competitive Examination 
conducted by the Federal Public Service Commission provided they have 
                                                          
Para-5 modified vide Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 6/4/2004-CP-II (ML&C) dated 29-10-2014. 
BPS. 

CHAPTER-2                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page -49                                                             
 
 
put in at least two years Government service. A maximum of two chances 
will be allowed after one has entered Government service. 
(b) 
There will also be a departmental examination under which departmental 
candidates can be considered for accelerated promotion to posts in BPS 
17. All officials having a minimum of 5 years Government service in BPS 
11 and above will be entitled to appear in this examination provided they 
are otherwise eligible. The upper age limit for this examination will be 45 
years for the first examination, 40 years for the next examination and 35 
years for subsequent examinations. 
 
11. 
The Secretary, Ministry of Defence, will prepare a scheme for the 
departmental examination at (b) above and obtain the approval of this Division. Subject 
to availability of suitable departmental candidates, promotion on accelerated basis 
through the above examination will be limited to a maximum of 25% of the total 
vacancies and these promotions will be reckoned against the direct recruitment quota. 
 
12. 
The existing arrangements with regard to personnel management of the 
"Military Lands and Cantonments Group" will continue under the overall supervision of 
the Ministry of Defence who will prepare Gradation Lists of all officers in BPS 17 and 
above. The Director, Military Lands and Cantonments will prepare, issue and maintain 
seniority lists of BPS 16 and below, the Ministry of Defence will submit periodical 
reports to the Establishment Secretary. Any major difficulty which may arise in the 
implementation of these instructions will be resolved in a meeting of the Establishment 
Secretary and the Secretary, Ministry of Defence. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.9/2/75-ARC, dated 11-5-1975]. 
 
2.11 
Office Management Group 
 
In continuation of the Establishment Division Office Memorandum No.3/2174-
ARC dated the 8th April, 1974, it has been decided to constitute another occupational 
group called Office Management Group which will comprise:- 
(i) 
all ministerial posts in the Federal Secretariat from BPS 1 to 16, 
(ii) 
posts of Section officers in BPS 17 & 18 ; and 
(iii) such other posts including posts in BPS 19 & 20 as may be specified and 
included in the Group from time to time. 
 
2. 
Subject to the delegation specified below, the administrative control of the 
Group will rest with the Establishment Division and will be exercised within the broad 
framework of rules and procedure as outlined in the succeeding paras. 
 
3. 
Ministerial Posts from BPS 1 to 16.—Each Ministry/Division will operate 
these posts as heretofore. The existing rules, regulations and instructions in regard to 
direct recruitment, promotion, provincial quotas, composition of promotion and selection 
committees, appointing authorities for various **grades etc., will continue to apply as 
heretofore. 
                                                          
Relates to the constitution of the Foreign Service of Pakistan. 
** BPS 

Page -50                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-2                                                     
 
 
 
4. 
Initial Composition of Group in respect of Posts in BPS-17 and Above.—
The following officers, including those who are on temporary deputation outside the 
Federal Secretariat, shall be included in the group on its initial constitution viz: 
(i) 
Section officers who already stood en-cadred in the former CSS Cadre 
through notifications issued from time to time. 
(ii) 
Section officers who were eligible to be en-cadred but notifications could 
not be issued before the abolition of the CSS Cadre. 
(iii) Section Officers directly recruited by FPSC till the end of 1974. 
(iv) Ad-hoc Section Officers who qualified in the promotional examinations of 
1967 & 1969 but who could not be adjusted on regular basis due to non-
availability of posts in the departmental quota. 
(v) 
Ad-hoc Section Officers who appeared in the promotional examinations of 
1967 & 1969 and were cleared by revising the standard in consultation 
with FPSC.  
 
5. 
Working Strength of Section Officers.—The strength of duty posts of 
Section Officers in Federal Secretariat will, for the present, be 750. **[10% percent of 
these posts will be reserved for appointment on deputation on tenure basis or by transfer 
of officers in BS-17 and BS-18 from other occupational groups/cadres and provincial 
civil servants in accordance with para 9 (A)]. There will be leave, training and deputation 
reserve as under: - 
 
Sanctioned Strength*** 
(i) 
 Leave reserve 10% of the duty posts……………. 
75 
(ii) 
Training & deputation reserve 15% 
……………….. 112 
 
of the duty posts. 
50% of the total strength of these posts will be in BPS 17 and the remaining 50% in BPS-
18. No vacancy in BPS 18 would occur if a Section Officer in BPS -18 is deputed to an 
ex-cadre post or sent on foreign service except when the deputationist ceases to have lien 
in the parent Group. 
 
6. 
Placing of Ad-Hoc Section Officers on Regular Footing.—Ad-hoc Section 
Officers other than those mentioned at clauses (iv) & (v) of para 4 above, are liable to be 
replaced by FPSC qualified Section Officers. Such of them as are not replaced will be 
required to take Section Officers (Qualifying) Examination to be conducted by the FPSC. 
Not more than two chances to clear the examination will be allowed. Final clearance will 
be given after taking into account the marks obtained by them in the Qualifying 
Examination, service record and the vacancies available at the time. Such of them as are 
cleared finally will be placed on regular footing. Those who do not clear it will be 
reverted. 
                                                          
Amended vide Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 10/1/74-C.III(A), dated 17-2-1979. 
**Subs vide Estt. Division‘s O.M. No.7/12/81-C.III (B)/(OMG.II) dated 4-11-1985. 
*** Ref. Estt. Div.‘s UO No. 13(2)/2000-OMG-I, dated April, 23, 2007. 

CHAPTER-2                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page -51                                                             
 
 
 
7. 
Future Recruitment.—(a)BPS -17: In future 2/3rd of the vacancies of 
Section Officers in BPS 17 may be filled by direct recruitment through FPSC. 
 
[Provided that the appointing authority may, in the public interest, fill up vacant 
posts falling to the share of initial appointment, through promotion in the prescribed manner]. 
 
**(b)(i) The remaining 1/3rd of the vacancies shall be filled by promotion of the 
departmental eligible candidates through a promotional examination. The promotional 
examination will be conducted by the FPSC. The condition of eligibility will be eight years 
service in BS-11 to BS-16 in President's Secretariat, Prime Minister's Secretariat, Senate 
Secretariat, National Assembly Secretariat, Federal Secretariat, Attached Departments, 
Wafaqi Mohtasib's Secretariat, Federal Service Tribunal, Federal Public Service Commission, 
Intelligence Bureau and also the Civilian employees of Pakistan Armed Forces Headquarters 
and their lower formations. 
 
***(b) (ii) Appointment on Acting Charge Basis:(a)In the case of vacancies of 
Section Officers in pay scale, 17 reserved for initial appointment, if the appointing 
authority is satisfied that the initial appointment will take sufficiently long time, the 
vacancies may be filled by making appointments on acting charge basis. 
(b) 
The Section Officers, serving on acting charge basis, may be appointed on 
regular basis to the posts held by them, depending on their merit position in 
the promotional examination, service record and availability of vacancies in 
the promotion quota, on the recommendation of Departmental Promotion 
Committee. 
(c) 
Lateral entry.- In order to meet the shortage of officers in the Federal 
Secretariat or to meet specific requirements, appointments may be made 
through lateral entry. Appointment through lateral entry will be made 
against 2/3rd vacancies reserved for direct recruitment. 
(d) 
Provision for accelerated promotion to the post of BPS 17.- In addition to 
the provisions made at (b) (i) above, eligible ministerial staff of the 
Federal Secretariat and its Attached Departments including Assistants, 
Superintendents, Assistant Private Secretaries and Private Secretaries etc. 
who hold a university degree and who are over the age of 25 years but 
below the age of 30 years may appear in the examination for direct 
recruitment of BPS-17 Section Officers conducted by the FPSC if they 
have been in continuous service for a period of not less than two years. 
Two chances will be allowed within the prescribed age limits. 
 
8. 
Training.—(a) After completion of their common training at the Academy 
for Administrative Training, the directly recruited officers allocated to the Office Management 
                                                          
 Added vide Establishment Division‘s O.M. No. 13/4/2004-OMG.I, dated 31-10-2002. 
**Subs. vide Establishment Division‘s O.M.No.13/2/98-OMG-I, dated 2.8.2000. 
***Added vide Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 7/12/81-C.III(B)/(OMG-II) dated 4-11-1985. 

Page -52                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-2                                                     
 
 
Group will be given on the job departmental training to be followed by an examination which 
may be prescribed. 
 
(b) 
Those successful at the promotional examination and finally cleared after 
taking into account marks obtained by them in the promotional examination and their 
service records shall undergo a training programme conducted at the Secretariat Training 
Institute before they are actually posted as Section Officers. 
 
9. 
BPS-18.—Promotion to BPS 18 will be from amongst Section Officers of 
BPS-17 who have rendered at least 5 years of service in this BPS, in accordance with the 
provisions of the Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973. 
 
*[9(A) 
A regular BS-17 or BS-18 Civil Servant, Provincial Civil Servant, 
Government Servant, Public Servant, or officer of Autonomous Body/Corporation having 
served on deputation in Federal Secretariat on Section Officers post for a period of three 
(03) years shall be eligible to appear in the examination (test and interview) to be 
conducted by the FPSC for appointment by transfer in OMG  on regular basis subject to 
provision of NOC for appointment by transfer in OMG from parent department of the 
candidate.  
For appointment by transfer in BS-17:— A regular BS-17 officer who has three years 
regular service at his credit in Federal Secretariat on deputation basis on Section Officer 
post.  
For appointment by transfer in BS-18:—  A regular BS-18 officer who has three years 
regular service at his credit in Federal Secretariat on deputation basis on Section Officer 
post.]  
 
10. 
BPS 19 & 20.—Promotion to such posts in BPS 19 and 20, as may be 
specified from time to time, will be made by selection from amongst eligible officers of 
the Group in accordance with the procedure etc. laid down in the Civil Servants 
(Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973. Minimum length of service 
required for eligibility to BPS-19 & 20 will be 12 years and 15 years, respectively in BPS 
-17 and above. Officers of this Group will also be eligible for the posts of Deputy 
Secretary and Joint Secretary, selection to which is made on the basis of written test and 
interview etc. 
 
11. 
BPS-21 & 22.—Selection to posts in these BPS will be made from 
amongst BPS -20 government servants and professionally qualified persons in the private 
sector. 
 
12. 
Seniority.—(a) Separate Division-wise seniority lists would be maintained 
for all posts in BPS 1 to 16 as hitherto on the basis of continuous regular officiation in the 
BPS. 
(b) 
All officers of BPS-17 will be borne on one combined seniority list to be 
drawn up in accordance with the following Principles:- 
                                                          
*Subs. vide Estt. Division‘s O.M. No.7/23/2016-E-VII,dated 07-02-2020. 

CHAPTER-2                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page -53                                                             
 
 
(i) 
Those Section Officers who were eligible for regular appointment as 
such under the former CSS Rules shall, as a class, rank senior to 
other Section Officers; their inter-se-seniority shall be fixed in 
accordance with provision of the said rules. 
(ii) The seniority of Section Officers other than those mentioned in (i) 
above shall be determined on the basis of date of regular continuous 
officiation as Section Officers provided that the promote officers of a 
particular year shall, as a class, be senior to the direct recruits of that 
year. Their inter-se-seniority, however, shall be determined in the case 
of direct recruits according to the order of merit assigned to them on 
completion of their training at the Academy for Administrative Training 
and, in the case of promoted officers, according to their order of merit as 
determined in the Promotional Examination. 
**(iii) The officers appointed vide para 7(b)(ii) will be assigned seniority 
according to merit position obtained by them in the Promotional -
Examination. The officers appointed on the basis of an earlier 
promotional examination will, as a batch, rank senior to those 
appointed on the basis of subsequent promotional examination. 
(c)   Seniority in BPS 18 and above will be determined in each BPS from the 
date of regular continuous officiating in each BPS. 
**(d) 
Officers appointed by transfer will be assigned seniority in accordance 
with Civil Servants Act, 1973 and the rules framed thereunder. 
 
13. 
General.—The existing provisions of CSS Rules and Section Officers 
(Probation, Training & Seniority) Rules, 1964 will continue to be in force to the extent they 
are not in conflict with the provisions of this Office Memorandum. However, this shall 
not be construed to limit or abridge the powers of the competent authority to issue new 
rules and instructions or revisions of the existing ones or to deal with cases of members 
of group in such manner as may appear to be just and equitable. 
[Authority:— Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No. 1/2/75-ARC, dated 27-01-1975]. 
 
2.12 
Pakistan Audit and Accounts Service 
 
Following the introduction of the Administrative Reforms by the Prime Minister 
on 20th August, 1973 and the abolition of services as a result thereof, the question of 
formation of new occupational groups to take the place of services has been under 
consideration of the government. Necessary information was called for from the 
Ministries/Divisions and Joint Secretary, Administrative Reforms, had detailed 
discussions with them. The first Ministry to be taken up was the Ministry of Finance. In 
respect of the Departments etc. under the Ministry of Finance, the President is now 
pleased to constitute an occupational group called the ***Accounts Group which shall 
comprise all posts in:- 
                                                          
Subs. vide Estt. Division‘s O.M. No.10/1/74-C.III(A), dated 17-2-1979. 
**Renumbered vide Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 7/12/81-C.III(B)/OMG-II, dated 4-11-1985. 
Accounts Group was renamed as Pakistan Audit and Accounts Service w.e.f. 10th December, 2002 vide Estt. 
Division‘s OM No. 1/17/92-CPII, dated 10th December, 2002. 

Page -54                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-2                                                     
 
 
 (i) 
the Pakistan Audit and Accounts Department, the Military Accounts 
Department and the Railway Accounts Department; 
[(ii)  the Accounts cadres of the T&T Department, the Pakistan Post Office 
and the office of the CAO, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and its 
sub-offices]; and 
 (iii) all Accounts posts under Ministries/Divisions and Departments of the 
Federal Government [other than the posts of Budget and Accounts 
Officers or Finance and Accounts Officers in the Ministries and Divisions 
of the Federal Secretariat.] 
 
2. 
The broad framework of rules and regulations etc. within which the Group 
will function is outlined below. 
 
[3. 
From BPS 1 to BPS 17.— Each Department will operate separately as 
heretofore except with regard to BPS 17 posts included in the Inter-Departmental Cadre 
vide para 4 below. The existing instructions in regard to quotas for direct recruitment and 
promotion, the composition of promotion and selection committees, the appointing 
authorities for various grades etc. will continue to apply.  All posts to be filled by direct 
recruitment will be advertised.] 
 
**[4. Inter-Department Cadre.— (a) All posts in BPS 17 which were formerly 
borne on the cadre of the former Accounts Services and 25% of BPS 17 accounts posts in 
the T & T @Department and Pakistan Post Office Department shall be borne on an 
Inter-Departmental Cadre.  Posts in BPS 17 sanctioned after 20th August, 1973 will be 
distributed between the Departmental and Inter-Departmental Cadres in the ratio of 3:1. 
The Cadre shall in addition comprise all posts in BPS 18 and above in the @@Accounts 
Group. Officers of the Inter-Departmental Cadre will be transferable from one 
Department to the other. 
 
(b) 
Appointments to posts in BPS 17 on the initial formation of the 
Inter-Departmental Cadre will be made by allocating posts to the promotee officers and 
the direct recruits in BPS 17 in the ratio of 50 : 50, on year-to-year basis. Future 
appointments to BPS 17 posts in the cadre will also be made by allocating vacancies 
arising in that pay scale to officers of the Departmental Cadre and the direct recruits in 
the ratio of 50 : 50.  The ratio is subject to review after 5 years. 
 
(c) 
All officers who are holding posts in BPS 18 and above on regular basis 
shall be deemed to have been appointed to the Inter-Departmental Cadre in their 
respective Grades. 
 
(d) 
The number of BPS 17 officers of a department approved for induction in 
the Inter-Departmental Cadre shall not exceed 50% of the number of BPS 17 posts 
contributed by that department to the Inter-Departmental Cadre. 
                                                          
 Subs. vide Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.10/22/82-R.2 dated 29-11-82 effective from 1-10-1987. 
T&T Department, converted into Pakistan Telecommunication Corporation Limited (PTCL), stands 
privatized as Pakistan Telecommunication Company Ltd. The National Telecommunication Corporation 
(NTC) caters to the government telecommunication requirements. 
 Subs. vide Estt.  Division‘s O.M. No. 2/1/75-ARC, dated 3-3-1976. 
@ Ref. to footnote # w.r. to para 1(ii). 
@@ Accounts Group was renamed as Pakistan Audit and Accounts Service w.e.f. 10th December, 2002 vide 
Estt. Division‘s OM No. 1/17/92-CPII, dated 10th December, 2002. 

CHAPTER-2                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page -55                                                             
 
 
 
(e) 
The probationer officers recruited on the results of the competitive 
examination held by the Federal Public Service Commission who, after completion of 
integrated training at the Academy for Administrative Training, are allocated to the 
Accounts Group, will undergo common departmental training, to be followed by an 
examination the details of which will be prepared by the Auditor General. Thereafter, 
they will be allocated to a particular Accounts Department. They will ordinarily remain in 
that Department until they get promotion to the next higher Grades]. 
 
[5. Posts in BPS 18 and above will be filled by promotion of officers of the 
Inter-Departmental Cadre in accordance with the prescribed procedure.] 
 
6. 
Secretariat Posts.— Officers of Accounts Departments will be eligible for 
Secretariat posts and will be selected, after written tests and interviews, for posts in BPS 
19 and 20, i.e. Deputy Secretary and Joint Secretary. These posts will be in a common 
pool to which officers of all federal and provincial departments will be eligible. Instead 
of making selection as and when vacancies occur, panels of officers for appointment to 
these posts would be prepared after tests as mentioned above. These panels will be 
prepared twice a year. Those selected for Deputy Secretary and Joint Secretary's posts 
would be put through a training programme of 3-4 months. Their final selection would be 
made after satisfactory completion of training. No posts of the rank of Deputy Secretary 
and Joint Secretary or equivalent in the Provincial Secretariat or the Federal Secretariat, 
tenable by officers of [All Pakistan Unified Grades] would be filled except from these 
panels. (Relaxation will be made with Prime Minister's approval in individual cases). 
 
7. 
For posts in BPS 21 and 22 i.e. Additional Secretaries and Secretaries and 
equivalent, the selection would be made from government servants of BPS 20 and above 
and also from amongst professionally qualified persons from the private sector. 
 
8. 
Lateral Entry.— In order to meet shortages of officers in the Accounts 
Group, or to meet specific requirements, appointments may be made to posts in the 
Accounts Group in any grade by recruitment through lateral entry of persons engaged in a 
profession, or in the service of a corporation or private organization, who possess such 
professional qualifications and experience as the President may from time to time 
determine. Similarly, officers of the Accounts Group may be posted to appropriate posts 
in corporations and private organizations under Government management and control. 
 
9. 
Seniority: (i) BPS 1 to [17].—***[Save as provided in (ii) below,] 
separate Department-wise seniority lists would be maintained for all posts in  
BPS 1 to ***[17] as hitherto on the basis of continuous regular officiation in the Grade. 
To meet shortages in a particular grade, and to ensure an even pace of promotion of 
employees in different Departments, it would be permissible to order transfer from one 
Department to another. 
 
***[(ii) BPS17 (Inter-Departmental Cadre).– 
                                                          
 Subs vide Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 2/1/75-ARC, dated 3-3-1976. 
 All Pakistan Services (Change in Nomenclature) Rules, 1973, notified vide SRO 1307(I)/73 dated 14-09-
1973, have been repealed vide SRO 89(I)/2014 dated 14-02-2014, whereby all notifications and instructions 
issued on the subject from time to time were mutatis mutandis amended. 
 Subs.& added vide Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 2/1/75-ARC, dated 3-3-1976. 

Page -56                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-2                                                     
 
 
 
(a)  A separate seniority list will be maintained in respect of BPS 17 officers 
of the Inter-Departmental Cadre; 
 
(b)  The promotee officers adjusted in a particular year will be placed senior to 
the direct recruits of that year; 
 
(c)  The inter-se-seniority of direct recruits of a year or batch will be 
determined on the basis of the order of merit of the Probationers 
determined at the time of final passing out from the Academy for 
Administrative Training. 
 
(d)  The inter-se-seniority of the Departmental officers inducted in the 
Inter-Departmental Cadre in a particular year shall be determined 
according to the date of their regular continuous officiation.] 
 
 
(iii) BPS 18 and above.— Seniority will be determined in each grade from the 
date of regular continuous officiation in the grade. 
 
10.  Departmental Examination.— The present departmental examination for 
promotion to posts in BPS 16 will continue to operate. 
 
11. 
Provision for accelerated promotion to posts in BPS 17.— To enable 
bright young persons who have failed to secure through competitive examination 
conducted by Federal Public Service Commission direct entry to BPS 17 posts, to get 
another  opportunity to compete for these posts, or to get accelerated promotion within 
the Department, the following two provisions are  made:— 
(a) 
They can appear in competitive examination upto the age of 30 years 
provided they have put in at least 2 years service. At present this 
relaxation is admissible upto the age of 28 years and is allowed only if one 
has not previously appeared in the examination. In future two chances will 
be allowed after one has entered government service. 
(b) 
There will also be a departmental examination under which departmental 
candidates can be considered for accelerated promotion in their own 
department. The upper age limit for this will be [45] years for the first 
examination, 40 years for the next examination and 35 years for all 
subsequent examinations. 
 
The Auditor General will prepare a scheme for the Departmental Examination at 
(b) above and obtain the approval of the Ministry of Finance and the Establishment 
Division.  Promotion on accelerated basis through the above examination will, subject to 
availability of suitable departmental candidates, be limited to a maximum of 25% of the 
total vacancies. [  ] 
 
**[12. The Inter-Departmental Cadre will be administered by the Auditor 
General and the Departmental Cadres by the respective Heads of Department.  The 
Auditor General will prepare and maintain a gradation list of all officers in Grade 17 and 
above in the Inter-Departmental Cadre while the Departmental Heads will maintain 
seniority list of officers and staff in Grade 17 and below in the Departmental Cadres. 
                                                          
 Added vide Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.2/l/75-ARC, dated 3-3-1976. 
Omitted and added ibid. 

CHAPTER-2                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page -57                                                             
 
 
 
Provided the Auditor General shall not make lateral interventions and 
transfer/postings in the offices under the control of Controller General of Accounts. For 
transfer/posting of Inter-Departmental Cadre Officers on posts in Controller General of 
Accounts Organization, Auditor General will place their services at the disposal of 
Controller General of Accounts after prior consultations for further posting in the office 
of CGA and/or in its Organizations. 
 
13. The other existing arrangements with regard to personnel management of the 
various Accounts Departments and cadres will continue. The Auditor General, in liaison 
with the Departments concerned, will be responsible for the smooth implementation of 
the instructions.  Any major difficulties which may arise will be resolved in a meeting of 
the Establishment Secretary, the Finance Secretary and Auditor General]. 
[Authority.-Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.1/2/74-ARC, dated 23-1-1974]. 
 
2.13 
Police Service of Pakistan (Composition, Cadre & Seniority)  
 
 
Rules,1985 
 
Consequent on the issue of Establishment Division Notification No. SRO. 
1033/I/85, dated 23-10-1985 regarding Police Service of Pakistan (Composition, Cadre & 
Seniority) Rules,1985 (Annex) the Establishment Division O.M No. 3/2/75-ARC, dated 
31-05-1975 constituting the Police Group is rescinded.   
 
.[Authority.-Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 3/1/84-CP.2, dated 05-11-1985]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
 Added vide Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.6/5/2012/CP-II dated 17-02-2014. 

Page -58                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-2                                                     
 
 
ANNEX 
 
S.R.O. 1033(I)/85.—In exercise of the powers conferred by section 25 of the 
Civil Servants Act, 1973 (LXXI of 1973), the President is pleased to make the following 
rules, namely:- 
 
1.  
Short title and commencement.— (1) These rules may be called the 
Police Service of Pakistan (Composition, Cadre and Seniority) Rules, 1985. 
 
(2) 
They shall come into force at once. 
 
2. 
Definitions.— In these rules, unless there is anything repugnant in the 
subject or context,— 
(a) 
"Cadre post" means a post specified in the Schedule; 
(b) 
"Commission" means the Federal Public Service Commission; 
(c) 
"Schedule" means the schedule to these rules; 
(d) 
"Service" means the Police Service of Pakistan referred to in rule 3. 
 
3. Change in nomenclature and composition.-(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in the All-Pakistan Services (Change in Nomenclature) Rules, 1973, the Police 
Group is renamed as the Police Service of Pakistan. 
 
(2) 
The Police Service of Pakistan shall consist of: 
(a) 
persons appointed or deemed to have been appointed to the Police Service 
of Pakistan in accordance with the Police Service of Pakistan 
(Composition and Cadre) Rules, 1969; 
(b) 
persons, other than those mentioned in clause (a), appointed to the *Police 
Group whose names appeared in the gradation list issued on the 28th  
August, 1980 and persons appointed in the **Police Group after that date 
but before the commencement of these rules; and 
(c) 
persons appointed to the Service in accordance with these rules. 
 
4. 
Cadre Strength.— (1) The cadre strength of the service shall be as 
specified in the Schedule. 
 
(2) 
The President, or a person authorized by him in this behalf, may, from 
time to time, and in the case of posts in connection with the affairs of a Province after 
consultation with the Governor of the Province, remove from or include any post in the 
Schedule. 
                                                          
* Nomenclature changed from Police Group vide Establishment Division‘s Notification No. SRO 1033(1)/85, 
dated 23-10-1985. 

CHAPTER-2                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page -59                                                             
 
 
 
5. 
Initial appointment.—(1) Initial appointment to the service against cadre 
posts in basic BPS 17 shall be made on the basis of the results of the competitive 
examinations held for the purpose by the Commission. 
 
(2) 
Unless the appointing authority in any case otherwise directs, a person 
appointed to the Service under sub-rule (1) shall be appointed to the Service as a 
probationer in accordance with the rules which the Federal Government may make from 
time to time, including rules and orders relating to training during probation, and shall be 
required to undergo such departmental training and pass such departmental examinations 
as may be specified by the Federal Government or the Government of the Province to 
which he is allocated. 
 
6. 
Appointment of officers of Armed Forces.— Officers of the Armed 
Forces of the rank of Captain and Major or equivalent shall be eligible for appointment to 
the Service in accordance with the procedure laid down by Government and against the 
cadre posts reserved for them from time to time. 
 
7. 
Appointment of members of Police cadre of a Province.— Members of 
the Police cadre of a Province shall be appointed to the Service on the basis of selection made 
on the recommendation of the Governor: 
 
Provided that appointment of members of the police cadre of a Province under 
this rule shall not exceed 40% of the senior cadre posts in that Province as specified in 
the Schedule. 
 
*[7-A. Appointment of members of Pakistan Railway Police.— Member of 
the Pakistan Railway Police shall be appointed to the service on the basis of selection 
made on the recommendation of the Ministry of Railways: 
 
Provided that the appointment of members of the Police cadre of Railways 
under this rule shall not exceed 40% of the senior cadre posts of Pakistan 
Railway Police as specified in the Schedule]. 
 
[7-B* – Appointment of members of police cadre of the Islamabad Capital 
Territory.— Members of Police cadre of the Islamabad Capital Territory shall be 
appointed to the service on the basis of selection made on the recommendations of 
Ministry of Interior: 
 
Provided that appointment of members of Police cadre under this rule shall not 
exceed 40% of the senior cadre posts in the Islamabad Capital Territory Police as 
specified in the schedule]. 
                                                          
*Ins. vide Estt. Div.‘s Notification No. SRO 258(1)/92, dated 16-04-1992 (E-Wing‘s note dated 29-11-2007 on File 
No. 1/8/2002-Manuals-PPARC- Review of Estacode). 

Page -60                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-2                                                     
 
 
 
[7-C. Appointment of members of police cadre of Gilgit-Baltistan.— 
Members of police cadre of Gilgit-Baltistan shall be appointed to the service on the basis 
of selection made on the recommendations of Governor, Gilgit-Baltistan: 
 
Provided that appointment of members of the police cadre of Gilgit-Baltistan 
under this rule shall not exceed forty percent of the senior cadre posts in Gilgit-Baltistan 
police as specified in the Schedule.]   
 
 
 
8. 
Appointment by promotion.- Members of the Service shall be eligible 
for promotion to higher posts in accordance with the Civil Servants (Appointment, 
Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973, and the administrative instructions issued from 
time to time. 
 
9. 
General.—(1) A cadre post shall ordinarily be filled by a member of the 
Service. 
 
(2) Nothing in sub-rule (1) shall be construed as preventing the posting to a 
cadre post of a person who is not a member of the Service: 
 
Provided that no such person shall be so posted for a period exceeding 
twelve months except with the previous sanction of the authority competent to 
make appointment to the post. 
 
10. 
Liability to serve.— A member of the Service shall be liable to serve 
anywhere in Pakistan in any post and to hold, if  he is so directed, more than one post at 
the same time. 
 
11. Seniority.— (1) The members of the Service referred to in clauses (a) and 
(b) of sub-rule (2) of rule 3 shall retain the same seniority as is shown in the gradation list 
as it stood immediately before the commencement of these rules. 
 
(2)  Persons appointed to the Service in accordance with these rules shall count 
seniority from the date of regular appointment against a post in the Service subject to the 
following conditions, namely:- 
 (a) persons selected for initial appointment on the basis of the same 
competitive examination shall on appointment reckon seniority inter se in 
accordance with the merit position obtained in that examination; 
 (b) officers of the Armed Forces selected for appointment to a cadre post on 
regular basis in a batch shall on appointment retain their seniority inter se: 
 
 
Provided that officers of the Armed Forces appointed in basic 
Grade 17 in a year shall be treated as senior to probationers appointed in 
the same year on the basis of the competitive examination held by 
Commission. 
                                                          
 Inserted vide Estt. Division‘s S.R.O No. 716(I)/2020 dated 03-08-2020.   

CHAPTER-2                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page -61                                                             
 
 
(c) 
members of the police cadre of a particular Province selected in a year 
shall on appointment to the Service take seniority inter se as in the 
Provincial cadre and in keeping with that sequence, each such member 
shall reckon his date of regular appointment to the Service from the day 
the respective vacancy arose in the senior cadre posts reserved in that 
Province for such officers as specified in the schedule: 
 
 
Provided that, if the date of regular appointment of officers of two or 
more Provinces be the same, their seniority inter se shall be determined on 
the basis of their date of regular appointment to the post of Superintendent 
of Police; 
 (d) officers selected for promotion in the same batch shall on promotion retain 
their seniority as in the lower post; and 
 (e) 
the general principles of seniority set out in the Establishment Division 
O.M. No. 1/16/69-D. II dated the 31st December, 1970, shall apply in 
matters not covered by these rules. 
 
12. 
The Police Service of Pakistan (Composition and Cadre) Rules, 1969, are 
hereby repealed. 
[Authority:— Estab. Div.‘s Notification No. SRO 1033(1)/85, dated 23.10.1985 as amended upto 
9.10.1988 vide Estt. Div.‘s Notification No. SRO No. 1034(1)/98, dated 9.10.1998]. 
 
 
 
                                                          
The principles of seniority stand replaced by Civil Servants (Seniority) Rules, 1993. 

Page -62                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-2                                                     
 
 
SCHEDULE 
THE POLICE SERVICE OF PAKISTAN 
CADRE STRENGTH 
 
 
I. THE FEDERATION 
 
1. 
Senior posts: 
 
 (A) Islamabad Capital Territory:- 
 
Inspector General of Police....... 
1 
 
Senior Superintendent of Police.. 
1 
 
Superintendent of Police.......... 
1 
 
Assistant  Inspector  General  of 
 
Police................................. 
1 
 
 
(B) Bureau of Police Research and 
 
 
Development:- 
 
 
 
Director General (I.G.) 
 
1 
 
 
Directors (D.I.G.) 
 
 
2 
 
 
Deputy Director (S.P.) 
 
1 
 
 
(C) Federal Control Room:- 
 
 
Director, (OSD) Security (D.I.G.) 
1 
 
 
Deputy Directors (S.P.) 
6 
 
 
(D) Special Security Cell:- 
 
 
Director (D.I.G.) 
 
 
1 
 
 
Deputy Directors (S.P.) 
 
4 
 
 
(E) Intelligence Bureau:- 
 
 
Director 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
Joint Directors  
 
 4 
 
 
Deputy Directors 
 
 
13 
 
 
Assistant Directors 
 
 
35 
 
 
(F) 
Federal Investigation Agency:- 
 
 
Director General 
 
1 
 
 
Additional Director General 
 
1 
 
 
Directors 
8 
 
 
Deputy Directors 
 
 
 25 
 
(G) 
Pakistan Railway Police:- 
 
 
Inspector General 
 
 1 
 
 
Deputy Inspector General 
 
 1 
 
 
Assistant Inspector General (S.P.) 
 7 
 
                                                          
 The nomenclature of posts borne on the cadre of PSP is reflected in Schedule attached to PSP (Composition, 
Cadre and Seniority) Rules, 1985. After the issuance of Police Order, 2002 substantial changes have occurred in 
the posts tenable by PSP officers.  
[Source: E-Wing’s note dated 29-11-2007 on File No. 1/8/2002-Manuals-PPARC, Review of Estacode]. 

CHAPTER-2                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page -63                                                             
 
 
 
(H) 
Pakistan Narcotics Control Board:- 
 
 
Chairman 
 
 1 
 
 
Directors 
 
 5 
 
 
Deputy Directors 
 
 5 
 
 
(I) 
States and Frontier Regions 
 
 
Division:- 
 
 
Commandant, Frontier Constabulary  
 
 
(Addl.I.G.) 
 
 
 
 1 
 
 
Deputy Commandant, Frontier  
 
 
Constabulary 
 
 
 
 1 
 
 
District Officers,  
 
 
Frontier Constabulary 
 
 9 
 
 
(J) 
Pakistan Motorway Police (M2)  
 
 
Islamabad - Lahore:- 
 
 
 
Inspector General 
 
 
 1 
 
 
Deputy Inspector General 
 1 
 
 
Superintendent of Police 
 
 
 
  
 
                                     ______ 
 
 
     Total Number of Senior Posts 
143 
 
 
2. 
Leave, deputation and training 
 
 
reserve at 40% of total number  
 
 
of senior posts (143)............ 
 57 
 
 
3. 
 [Junior posts:- 
 
 
 
(a) Islamabad Capital Territory 
 9 
 
 
(b) Frontier Constabulary 
 10 
 
 
(c) Pakistan Motorway Police 
13 
 
 
  
 
               ______ 
 
 
Total Numbers of Junior Posts 
     32 
 
 
» 
Total Authorized Strength  
 
 
 
 
at the Centre............... 
  232 
 
II. THE PUNJAB 
 
1. 
Senior posts: 
 
 
Inspector General of Police................. 
1 
 
Addl. Inspectors General of Police....... 
2 
                                                          
Added & Subs vide Estt. Division‘s Notification No. S.R.O. No.1034(1)/98 dated 9-10-1998. 
 The post of IGP in the provinces has been renamed as Provincial Police Officer (PPO). 

Page -64                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-2                                                     
 
 
 
Commandant, Police Training  
 
College, Sihala............................... 
1 
 
Dy. Inspectors General of Police.......... 
13 
 
Ranges................. 
8 
 
 
 
(Rawalpindi, Gujranwala, 
 
Lahore,  Sargodha,  
 
Faisalabad,  Multan,  
 
Bahawalpur and Dera 
 
Ghazi Khan). 
 
 
Crime................... 
1 
 
Headquarters..........  
1 
 
Traffic.................. 
1 
 
Telecommunication & 
 
Transport.............. 
1 
 
Commandant, Punjab Reserve 
 
Police................... 
1 
 
 
Assistant Inspectors General of Police........ 
5 
 
(Finance, Establishment, Welfare, Legal  
 
and Training) 
 
 
Senior Superintendents of Police................ 
5 
 
 (Rawalpindi, Lahore, Faisalabad, 
 
Multan and Gujranwala). 
 
 
District Superintendents of Police............... 
29 
 
 
(Kasur, Sheikhupura, Attock, Jhelum, Sargodha, Khushab, Mianwali, Bhakhar, 
Vehari, Sahiwal, Okara, Muzaffargarh, Bahawalpur, Bahawal Nagar, Rahim Yar Khan, 
Khanewal, Sialkot, Gujrat, Chakwal, Toba Tek Sing, Jhang, D.G. Khan, Rajan-pur, 
Leyyah and Lahore (Administration, Headquarter, City Cantonment and Traffic). 
 
 
Superintendents of Police, Special Branch........ 
8  
 
 
 
Lahore.............. 
6 
 
 
Rawalpindi......... 
1 
 
 
Faisalabad.......... 
 1 
 
Superintendents of Police Prov. Crime (Crimes  
 
Branch).................................................  
 2 
 
Superintendent of Police, Telecommunication.. 
 1 
 
Superintendent of Police, Motor Transport..... 
 1 
 
Superintendents of Police, Control Room.......  
 3 
 
Addl. Superintendents of Police................... 
 7 
 
 
(Faisalabad, Rawalpindi, Gujranwala,  
 
 
Multan, Sahiwal, Sargodha and Bahawalpur). 

CHAPTER-2                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page -65                                                             
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deputy Commandant, Punjab Reserve Police.... 
 1 
 
Deputy Commandant, Police Training College, 
 
Sihala..................................................... 
1 
 
 
 
   ______ 
 
 
Total Number of Senior Posts: 
80 
 
 
No. of posts to be filled by appointment  
 
of Provincial Police officers at 40% of total  
 
number of senior posts(80)...................32 
 
2. 
Leave, deputation and training reserve at 40%  
 
of the number of senior posts(80).................  
 32 
 
3.  
Junior posts for ordinary duties.................... 
 50 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   ______ 
 
            Total authorised strength of the Punjab........... 
162 
 
III.  SINDH 
1.  
Senior posts: 
 
 
Inspector General of Police............ 
 1 
 
Addl. Inspector General of Police...... 
 1 
 
Deputy Inspectors General of Police.... 
 8 
 
 
Ranges.................... 
3 
 
 
(Karachi, Hyderabad & Sukkur) 
 
 
Headquarters.............. 
1 
 
 
Special Branch...............  
1 
 
 
Training & Inspection........ 
1 
 
 
Crime......................... 
1 
 
 
Traffic....................... 
1 
 
 
Assistant Inspectors General............... 
 4 
 
 
 
 
 
(Establishment, Telecommunication, 
 
 
Motor Transport and General). 
 
 
Senior Superintendents of Police........... 
 5 
 
 
(Karachi-3, Hyderabad & Sukkur) 
 
 
District Superintendents of Police..........  
 10 
 
 
(Sanghar, Tharparkar, Badin, Dadu, 
 
 
Thatta, Nawab Shah, Khairpur, 
 
 
Larkana, Jacobabad and Shikarpur). 
                                                          
 Renamed as Provincial Police Officer (PPO). 

Page -66                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-2                                                     
 
 
 
Superintendents of Police, Crime............ 
 2 
 
 
(Sukkur and Karachi). 
 
 
Superintendents of Police, Traffic.......... 
 6 
 
 
(Karachi-3, Hyderabad,Sukkur & 
 
 
ADIG, Traffic). 
 
 
Superintendents of Police, Special Branch..... 
 6 
 
 
(Headquarters, Hyderabad, Sukkur, 
 
 
Survey, Political Security &Asstt. 
 
 
D.I.G.). 
 
 
Superintendents of Police, Karachi............. 
 3 
 
 
(CIA, Security and Administration) 
 
Commandant, Sindh Constabulary................. 
 1 
 
Principal, Police Training College, Shahdadpur... 
 1 
 
Addl. Superintendents of Police................ 
 6 
 
 
(Karachi-4, Hyderabad & Sukkur) 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                         
______    
 
 
 Total Number of Senior Posts:  
 54    
 
 
 
 
 
Number of posts to be filled by  
 
 
appointment of Provincial Police  
 
 
Officers at 40% of total number  
 
 
senior posts(54)................. 
22     
2. 
Leave, deputation and training reserve at 40%  
 
of the total number of senior posts (54)....... 
22 
 
3.  
Junior posts for ordinary duties................. 
16 
 
 
 
 
Total authorised strength of Sindh.... 
92 
 
IV.  THE N.W.F.P 
1. 
Senior posts: 
 
 
Inspector General of Police.......... 
1 
 
Deputy Inspectors General of Police.. 
7 
 
 
 
Ranges........................ 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
(Peshawar, D.I. Khan, Malakand 
 
 
Hazara, and Kohat). 
 
 
 
 
Headquarters.................. 
1 
 
 
Special Branch................ 
1 
 
                                                          
 Now K.P.K. 
 Renamed as Provincial Police Officer (PPO) 

CHAPTER-2                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page -67                                                             
 
 
 
Assistant Inspectors General of Police................ 
3 
 
 
(Traffic, Crime and Telecommunication) 
 
 
Senior Superintendents of Police................. 
2  
 
 
(Peshawar and Abbottabad). 
 
District Superintendents of Police................ 
13 
 
 
(H.Q.Peshawar (Rural), Peshawar (Urban), Mardan, 
 
 
Kohat, D.I. Khan, Bannu, Dir, Swat, Chitral, 
 
 
Mansehra, Kohistan and Karak). 
 
 
Superintendents of Police, Special Branch..... 
4 
 
 
(Political, Security, Survey and  
 
 
Special Cell) 
 
 
Superintendent of Police, Crime.......... 
1 
 
Superintendent of Police, Traffic........ 
1 
 
Addl. Superintendent of Police, Abbottabad... 
1 
 
Principal, Police Training School, Hangu........ 
1 
 
Director, Forensic Science Laboratory (Crime Branch)........ 
1 
 
S.P., Joint Investigation Team (JIT)........... 
1 
 
S.P.,(Task Force).............................. 
1 
 
 
 
Total Number of Senior Posts 
37 
 
 
Number of posts to be filled by  
 
 
appointment of Provincial Police  
 
 
Officers at 40% of total number of  
 
 
senior posts (37)=15 
 
2.  
Leave, deputation and training  
 
reserve at 40% of the total number 
 
of senior posts (37)....................... 
15 
 
3.  
Junior posts for ordinary duties........ 
15 
 
 
 
 
Total authorised strength of the NWFP 
67 
 
 
V. BALOCHISTAN 
1. 
Senior posts: 
 
 
Inspector General of Police.............. 
1 
 
Deputy Inspectors General of Police... 
4 
 
 
Ranges  ................ 
3 
 
 
(Quetta, Sibi and Kalat) 
 
 
Special Branch ......... 
1              
                                                          
 Now K.P.K. 
 
 Renamed as Provincial Police Officer (PPO). 

Page -68                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-2                                                     
 
 
 
Assistant Inspectors General of Police.... 
2 
 
Senior Superintendent of Police........... 
1 
 
District Superintendents of Police 
7 
 
 
Sibi, Kalat, Mekran, Lasbella, 
 
 
Loralai Pishin and Nasirabad). 
 
Superintendent of Police, Special Branch..... 
1 
 
Superintendent of Police, Crime Branch...... 
1 
 
Superintendent of Police,Telecommunication. 
1 
 
Superintendent of Police, Motor Transport... 
1 
 
Superintendent of Police, Special  
 
Investigation Cell (SB)............................ 
1 
 
Commandant, Balochistan Reserve Police..... 
1 
 
Principal, Police Training School, Quetta..... 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
Total Number of Senior Posts:  
22 
 
 
Number of posts to be filled by appointment of  
 
 
 
Provincial Police Officers at 40% of total number 
 
 
of senior posts (22)....................9 
 
2. 
Leave, deputation and training reserve at 40%  
 
of the total number of senior posts (22).................. 
9 
 
3.  
Junior posts for ordinary duties ............... 
6 
 
 
Total authorised strength of     
 
 
Balochistan.................      
37 
 
 
 
 
TOTAL CADRE STRENGTH    
[590] 
 
 
2.14 
Postal Group 
 
 
In continuation of Establishment Division Office Memorandum No. 6/2/75-
ARC, dated the 8th May , 1975, it has been decided to constitute another Occupational 
Group to be called the "Postal Group", comprising all posts in the Pakistan Post Office 
Department (except the Accounts Posts) and such other posts as may be included in the 
Group from time to time.  The administrative control of the group will vest in the 
Ministry of Communications and will function within the following broad framework of 
rules and procedure. 
 
 
2. 
Grade 1-16.—The posts in **Grade 1-16 in the Department will be 
operated as hithertofore. The existing instructions in regard to direct recruitment and 
promotion quotas, the composition of Promotion and Selection Committees, the 
appointing authorities for various scales etc. will continue to apply. All posts to be filled 
                                                          
 Subs. vide Estt. Division‘s Notification No. S.R.O.1034(1)/98, dated 9-10-1998. 
 BPS. 

CHAPTER-2                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page -69                                                             
 
 
by direct recruitment will be advertised except posts in *Grade 16 which will be reported 
to the Federal Public Service Commission. 
 
3. 
*Grade 17.— Seventy-five percent posts in *Grade 17 will be filled 
through competitive examination and 25% through promotion. After completion of 
integrated training at the Academy for Administrative Training, the probationer officers 
allocated to the Postal Group will undergo departmental training to be followed by an 
examination, the details of which will be prepared by the Ministry of Communications. 
Thereafter they will be allocated to various posts in the Postal Group. 
 
4. 
*Grade 18 and above.— The officers in *Grade 18 and above in the 
Department will be administered as hitherto.  The procedure for promotions and other 
matters as laid down in the Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 
1973 will be observed. 
 
5. 
Officers of this Group will be eligible for Secretariat posts (Deputy 
Secretary and above) in accordance with the procedure prescribed for recruitment to these 
posts from time to time. 
 
6. 
Lateral Entry.— In order to meet shortages of officers in the Postal Group, 
or to meet specific requirements, appointments may be made to posts in the Postal Group 
in any Grade by recruitment through lateral entry of persons engaged in a profession or in 
the service of a corporation or private organization, who possess such professional 
qualifications and experience as may be prescribed from time to time. 
 
7.  
Seniority: (i) *Grade 1-15.— Seniority lists for all posts in *Grade 1-15 
will be maintained as hithertofore on the basis of continuous regular officiation in the Grade. 
 
(ii)  *Grade 16 & 17.— The inter-se-seniority of direct recruits in *Grade 16 
will be determined on the basis of the marks obtained at the Federal Public Service 
Commission examination, whereas the inter-se-seniority of direct recruits in *Grade 17 
will be determined on the basis of merit of the probationers determined at the time of 
final passing out from the Academy for Administrative Training. 
 
The inter-se-seniority of officers promoted to *Grade 16 and 17 will be 
determined in their respective *Grades with reference to the dates of their regular 
continuous officiation in the *Grade. As for seniority of direct recruits vis-a-vis promoted 
officers the direct recruits of a particular year will as a class rank junior to the promoted 
officers of that year. 
 
(iii)  *Grade 18 and above.— Seniority will be determined in each scale from 
the date of regular continuous officiation in the *Grade. 
 
8. Departmental Examinations.— The present departmental examinations for 
direct recruits in various scales and for promotion to posts in higher *Grades will 
continue to operate. 
 
9. 
Provision for accelerated promotion to posts in *Grade 17.— To enable 
bright young persons who have failed to secure through competitive examination 
                                                          
*BPS/post. 

Page -70                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-2                                                     
 
 
conducted by Federal Public Service Commission direct entry to *Grade 17 posts to get 
another opportunity to compete for these posts, or to get accelerated promotion within the 
Department, the following two provisions are made:— 
 
(a) 
they can appear in the F.P.S.C. competitive examination upto the age of 30 
years provided they have put in at least two years service. A maximum of 
two chances will be allowed after one has entered Government service. 
 
(b) 
there will also be departmental examination under which departmental 
candidates can be considered for accelerated promotion in their own 
department.  The upper age limit for this will be 45 years for the first 
examination, 40 years for the next examination and 35 years for 
subsequent examinations. 
 
The Director General, Pakistan Post Office will prepare a scheme for the 
departmental examination at (b) above and obtain the approval of the Ministry of 
Communications and the Establishment Division. Promotion on accelerated basis through 
the above examination will, subject to availability of suitable department-tal candidates, 
be limited to a maximum of 25% of the total vacancies. These promotions will be 
reckoned against direct recruitment quota. 
 
10.  The existing arrangements with regard to personnel management in 
respect of various posts included in the Postal Group will continue.  The Director 
General, Pakistan Post Office, will be responsible for the smooth implementation of the 
above instructions. He will prepare a scale-wise seniority list of all officers in *Grade 16 
and above, while the respective Post Masters General will prepare, issue and maintain 
seniority lists of official of *Grade 15 and below as hitherto. The Director General will 
submit periodical reports to the Establishment Secretary. Any major difficulties which 
may arise in implementation of these instructions will be resolved in a meeting of the 
Establishment Secretary, Secretary, Ministry of Communications and the Director 
General, Pakistan Post Office. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.7/2/75-ARC, dated 30-5-1975]. 
 
2.15 
Secretariat Group 
 
In continuation of the Establishment Division Office Memorandum No. 
1/2/75-ARC, dated the 27th January, 1975, it has been decided to constitute another 
occupational group to be called the "Secretariat Group". The Group will comprise posts 
of Deputy Secretary and above in the Federal Secretariat and such posts in the Provincial 
Secretariats as are borne on the cadre of *[All Pakistan Unified Grades]. 
 
2. 
The Secretariat Group will be under the administrative control of the 
Establishment Division and will function in accordance with the rules and procedures 
outlined below. 
 
3.  
Deputy Secretary.— Appointment to the post of Deputy Secretary will be 
made in accordance with the following methods:- 
                                                          
* All Pakistan Services (Change in Nomenclature) Rules, 1973, notified vide SRO 1307(I)/73 dated 14-09-1973, 
have been repealed vide SRO 89(I)/2014 dated 14-02-2014, whereby all notifications and instructions issued 
on the subject from time to time were mutatis mutandis amended. 

CHAPTER-2                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page -71                                                             
 
 
 (i)  By promotion of Grade 18 officers of the Office Management Group and 
the Secretariat Group on the recommendations of the Central Selection 
Board. 
*(ii) 
By horizontal movement from other Occupational Groups of Grade 19 
Officers 
who 
have 
been 
recommended 
by 
the 
 
Ministries/ 
Divisions/Departments or Provincial Governments and have been found fit 
by the Central Selection Board. 
(iii) By direct appointment on the recommendations of Federal Public Service 
Commission of persons possessing such qualifications and experience etc., 
as may be prescribed. *[ ] 
 
4.  
Joint Secretary.— Appointment to the post of Joint Secretary will be made 
as under:- 
(i) 
By promotion of officers in the **Grade of Deputy Secretary on the 
recommendations of the Central Selection Board. 
(ii) 
By horizontal movement of such **Grade 20 Officers of the various 
occupational groups as are recommended by the Ministries/ Divisions, 
Departments, Provincial Governments etc. and are found fit by the Central 
Selection Board. 
(iii) By direct appointment on the recommendations of the Federal Public Service 
Commission of persons possessing such qualifications and experience etc. as 
may be prescribed. [ ] 
 
5.  
Additional Secretary@.— Appointment to the post of Additional Secretary 
will be made by selection from amongst Joint Secretaries, officers of Grade 20 and above 
belonging to the various occupational groups, and professionally qualified persons in the 
public sector enterprises and the private sector. 
 
6.  
Secretary **(Grade 22).— Appointment to the post of Secretary will be 
made by selection from amongst Additional Secretaries, officers of **Grade 21 and above in 
the various occupational groups and professionally qualified persons from the public sector 
enterprises and the private sector. 
 
7. 
Provincial Secretariats.—All posts of Deputy Secretary and above in the 
Provincial Secretariats borne on the cadre of @@[All Pakistan Unified Grades] will be filled on 
All-Pakistan basis. The selection will be made from amongst officers of the Secretariat Group 
by promotion, on the recommendations of a Selection Board headed by the Establishment 
Secretary and consisting of all the Chief Secretaries. Officers of the Office Management 
                                                          
* Subs vide Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.2/1/79-R.II, dated 12-6-1979. 
 BPS. 
 Omitted vide Estt. Division‘s OM No. 2/2/75-ARC, dated 7.5.1976 
@ Add Sr. JS. (BPS 21). 
@@All Pakistan Services (Change in Nomenclature) Rules, 1973, notified vide SRO 1307(I)/73 dated 14-09-
1973, have been repealed vide SRO 89(I)/2014 dated 14-02-2014, whereby all notifications and instructions 
issued on the subject from time to time were mutatis mutandis amended. 

Page -72                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-2                                                     
 
 
Group of the Provincial Government will also be eligible for appointment by promotion to the 
post of Deputy Secretary in the Provincial Secretariat. 
 
8. 
Seniority.— Deputy Secretary.— Seniority would be determined from the 
date of continuous regular officiation as Deputy Secretary, or in a post in Grade 19, 
whichever is earlier. 
 
9. 
Joint Secretary.— The seniority of a Joint Secretary which is a post in 
*Grade 20 will be determined from the date of his continuous regular officiation in 
*Grade 20. 
 
10. 
Additional Secretaries and Secretaries.— The seniority of Additional 
Secretaries and Secretaries will be determined from the date of continuous regular 
officiation in *Grade 21 or 22 as the case may be. 
 
11. 
Training.— Deputy Secretaries and Joint Secretaries appointed on the 
recommendations of Federal Public Service Commission will undergo a training course 
of appropriate duration, before their appointment in the Secretariat. 
 
12. 
In-service training will be an important factor towards determining the fitness 
for promotion of a Secretariat Officer to the next higher *Grade. 
 
13. 
General.— Horizontal movement of officers of this Group to posts in 
equivalent *Grades in the other occupational groups will be permissible. 
 
14. 
The terms and conditions of government servants belonging to this Group 
will be governed, as in the case of other government servants, by the provisions of the 
Civil Servants Act, 1973, and rules and orders issued thereunder from time to time. 
 
15.  This supersedes Establishment Division O.M. No. 2/2/75- ARC, dated the 
21st February, 1975. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 2/2/75-ARC, dated 12-4-1976]. 
 
2.16 
Railways (Commercial & 
Transportation) Group 
 
It has been decided to constitute another occupational group to be called 
―Railways (Commercial & Transportation) Group‖ which shall comprise of all posts as 
may be included in the Group from time to time. The Group will be under the 
administrative control of the Ministry of Railways and will function with the following 
broad framework of rules and procedure. 
2. 
The existing posts in BS- 17 to BS-21 indicated in the Schedule to this 
O.M. shall form part of the Railways (Commercial & Transportation) Group. In addition, 
there will be a deputation, training and leave reserve as may be determined by the Federal 
Government from time to time. 
3. 
BS-17.— 80% posts of BS 17 will continue to be filled, as at present 
through competitive examination conducted by Federal Public Service Commission and 
20% through promotion from amongst the departmental incumbents in accordance with 
                                                          
 BPS. 

CHAPTER-2                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page -73                                                             
 
 
the recruitment rules thereof. After completion of Common Training Programme at the 
Civil Service Academy, Lahore, the probationer officers will undergo the Departmental 
training before posting as prescribed by the Ministry of Railways. Officers to be 
promoted to BS-17 may also be required to undergo any such departmental training 
before promotion as the Ministry of Railways may prescribe in consultation with 
Establishment Division.     
4. 
All the existing officers holding posts in BS-17 and above on regular basis 
and have been appointed through Competitive examination or through departmental 
promotion in Ministry of Railways against seats reserved for Transportation & 
Commercial cadre shall be deemed to have been appointed in the Railways (Commercial 
& Transportation) Group in their respective grades. 
5. 
BS-18 and above.— The posts will be filled by promotion on the basis of 
selection from amongst eligible officers of the group in accordance with the procedure 
laid down in the Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules,1973 and 
other instructions issued from time to time, or if no candidate is considered suitable from 
within the group by horizontal movement of suitably qualified and experience officers 
from other Occupational Groups/Services. Government instructions regarding minimum 
length of service for eligibility for promotion to BPS-18,19 and 20 will be observed. 
6. 
Seniority: (i) BS-17. The inter-se-seniority of direct recruits to BS-17 is 
determined on the basis of Occupational Groups/Services (Probation, Training & 
Seniority) Rules,1990 and such other rules /instructions as may be issued by the 
Government from time to time. The inter-se-seniority of the promoted offices to BS-17 
shall be determined according to the date of their regular promotion in BS-17 in 
accordance with Civil Servants (Seniority) Rules,1993. 
(ii) 
Officers appointed to BS-18 and above in the Railways (Commercial & 
Transportation) Group on regular basis will be governed by Civil Servants (Seniority) 
Rules,1993. 
7. 
General Cadre Posts.— The officers of the Group will be eligible for 
posting against general cadre posts in Pakistan Railways in line with the mechanism 
approved by Railways Board unless specified otherwise by the Government. 
8. 
Secretariat Posts.— Officers of this Group will be eligible for Secretariat 
posts in BS-19 and above in accordance with the policy and criteria, as may be laid down 
by the Federal Government from time to time, for such posts in Secretariat Group. 
9. 
The recruitment rules for various posts framed with the concurrence of 
Establishment Division and FPSC shall remain in force. 
10. 
Any difficulty arising in the implementation of this O.M. will be resolved 
on the recommendations of an Anomaly Committee comprising representatives (not 
below the rank of BS-21) of the Establishment Division and Ministry of Railways. The 
decision of Establishment Secretary in this respect shall be final.  
[Authority:- Establishment Division‘s O.M.No.F.1/13/92-CP-II dated 12-10-2012.] 

Page -74                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-2                                                     
 
 
SCHEDULE INDICATING THE POSTS IN BS-17 TO BS-21 FORMING  
PART OF RAILWAYS (COMMERCIAL & TRANSPORTATION) 
GROUP(PARA.2 OF ESTABLISHMENT DIVISION’S O.M.NO.1/13/92-CP-II 
DATED 12TH OCTOBER,2012) 
 
S. 
No. 
Nomenclature 
Basic 
Scale 
No. of 
Posts 
1.  
Additional General Manager/Freight 
21 
1 
2.  
Chief Operating Superintendent 
20 
2 
3.  
Chief Commercial Manager 
20 
2 
4.  
Chief Commercial Marketing Manager 
20 
2 
5.  
Director Operations 
20 
1 
6.  
Deputy Chief Operating Superintendent. 
19 
4 
7.  
Deputy Divisional Superintendent 
19 
2 
8.  
Deputy Chief Commercial Manager 
19 
4 
9.  
Joint Director/Traffic/Walton 
19 
1 
10.  
Deputy Chief Traffic Manager (Dry Port) 
19 
1 
11.  
Deputy Chief Commercial & Marketing Manager 
19 
3 
12.  
Joint Director/Traffic and Commercial 
19 
1 
13.  
Divisional Transportation Officer 
18 
8 
14.  
Divisional Commercial Officer 
18 
7 
15.  
Senior Transportation Officer 
18 
1 
16.  
Deputy Traffic Manager/Dry Port 
18 
1 
17.  
Senior Commercial Manager 
18 
1 
18.  
Divisional Marketing Manager 
18 
2 
19.  
Deputy Manager Corporate Plan 
18 
1 
20.  
Senior Rates Officer 
18 
1 
21.  
Deputy Director(Traffic) 
18 
1 
22.  
Deputy Director (Commercial) 
18 
1 
23.  
Costing Manager (FBU) 
18 
1 
24.  
Assistant Transportation Officer 
17 
20 
25.  
Assistant Commercial Officer 
17 
3 
26.  
Joint Transport Officer 
17 
2 
27.  
Junior Commercial Officer 
17 
5 
28.  
Assistant Director/Traffic 
17 
1 
29.  
Assistant Traffic Manager/Dry Port 
17 
1 
30.  
Assistant Marketing Manager/Rates  
17 
1 
31.  
Assistant Commercial Manager 
17 
13 
32.  
Junior Officer/Coaching  
17 
1 
33.  
Assistant Costing Manager 
17 
1 
34.  
Station Manager 
17 
1 
Total 
98 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-2                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page -75                                                             
 
 
II. SENIORITY & LENGTH OF SERVICES   
 
3.1 
Occupational Groups and Services  
 
 
(Probation, Training and Seniority)  
 
 
Rules, 1990 
 
S.R.O. 874(I)90.— In exercise of the powers conferred by section 25 read with 
Section 6 and 8 of the Civil Servants Act 1973 (LXXI of 1973), the President is pleased 
to make the following amendments in the Occupational Groups and Services (Probation, 
Training and Seniority)  Rules,1990. 
 
1. 
Short title and commencement.— (1) These rules may be called the 
Occupational Groups and Services (Probation, Training and Seniority) Rules,1990. 
 
(2) 
These rules shall take effect from 1st October, 1990. 
 
2. 
Definitions.— In these rules, unless there is anything repugnant in the 
subject or context:-  
(i) 
―appointing authority‖ means the person authorized to make appointment 
to that post under rule 6 of the Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion 
and Transfer) Rules, 1973‖;  
(ia)  ―Commission" means the Federal Public Service Commission; 
(ii) 
―Examination" includes any exercise approved by the Government which 
is intended to test a probationer in a field of training during the training 
programme; 
(iii) ―Final Passing Out Examination" means the Final Passing Out 
Examination conducted by the Commission or the department concerned 
after conclusion of specialized training; 
(iv) ―Government" means the Federal Government (in the Establishment 
Division); 
(v) 
―Head of training institution" means the head of a training institution or 
place where members of an occupational group or service are imparted 
training; 
(vi) ―Inductee" means a person transferred to any occupational group or 
service by induction from the Armed Forces; 
(vii) ―Initial training" means the training prior to specialized training undertaken by 
the probationers of any one occupational group or service or jointly by 
combination of any occupational groups or services at a training institution or 
place that the Government may specify; 
(viii) ―Occupational Group or Service" means any group or service recruitment 
to which is made through the competitive examination conducted by the 
Commission from time to time against BPS 17 posts under the Federal 
Government or any occupational group or service transfer to which is 
made from the Armed Forces by induction and includes the following:- 

Page -76                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-2                                                     
 
 
(a)  
Pakistan Audit and Accounts Service 
(b)  Commerce and Trade Group 
(c)  
Pakistan Customs Service 
(d)  Pakistan Administrative Service 
(e)  
Foreign Service of Pakistan 
(f)  
Inland Revenue Service 
(g) 
Information Group 
(h)  Military Lands and Cantonment Group 
(i)  
Office Management Group 
(j)  
Police Service of Pakistan 
(k) 
Postal Group 
(l)  
Railways (Commercial & Transportation) Group and 
(m)  Any other service or group which may be notified by the 
Government as such. 
(ix) "Probationer" means a person appointed to any occupational group or 
service on probation and includes an inductee; and 
(x) 
"Specialized training" means training subsequent to the initial training 
undertaken by the probationers of an occupational group or service at a 
training institution or place that the Government  may specify. 
 
3.  Training Programmes and examinations.—(1)Every probationer shall 
undergo training in such training institutions and at such places and at such time and for 
such period and appear in such examinations as the Government may specify. Any 
probationer who fails to undergo prescribed training and qualify the prescribed 
examination shall render his appointment liable to termination without notice:  
 
Provided that the Appointing Authority may, on the recommendations of a 
Special Medical Board and the Federal Public Service Commission allow deferment of 
training and examination if so justified on the basis of compelling medical grounds [:] 
 
***Provided further that the Prime Minister may allow deferment of training for 
any cogent reason.  
 
(2) 
A probationer shall qualify every examination to the satisfaction of the 
head of the training institution where he is undergoing training. 
 
(3) 
In addition to 1500 marks of CSS examination, 500 marks shall be 
allocated for initial training programme, 600 marks for specialized training programme 
and 1000 marks for the final passing out examination. 
 
(4) 
Every probationer shall be required to qualify the Final Passing out 
Examination in the subjects approved by the Government. 
 
(5) 
The maximum of 1000 marks allocated for Final Passing out Examination 
shall be distributed among the subjects as approved by the Government. 
                                                          
 Accounts Group was renamed as Pakistan Audit and Accounts Service. w.e.f. 10th December, 2002 vide Estt. 
Division‘s O.M No. 1/17/92-CPII, dated 10th December, 2002. 
 Added vide S.R.O 258(I)/2001, dated 28-04-2001. 
 Subs. & added vide Notification S.R.O No. 743(I)/2016 dated 11-08-2016. 

CHAPTER-2                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page -77                                                             
 
 
 
(6) 
A probationer who fails to qualify in any subject or subjects in the Final 
Passing Out Examination shall be allowed two more chances to appear in the 
examination to be held subsequently in such subject or subjects. 
 
(7) 
Qualifying the MBA Tax Management Programme will be mandatory for 
Income Tax Group and *Customs and Excise Group officers with effect from 31st 
Common Training Program (CTP). The MBA Tax Management and its evaluation will 
be considered for all relevant rules and purposes covered under Occupational Groups and 
Services(Probation, Training and Seniority) Rules,1990. 
 
4. 
Effect of unsatisfactory completion of training programme:(1) If on the 
conclusion of a training programme, the performance or conduct of a probationer is 
determined by the head of the training institution to be unsatisfactory, the Government may 
require such probationer to undergo such further training as it deems fit. 
 
(2) 
 If a probationer is prevented by sickness or any other adequate cause from 
completing a training programme to the satisfaction of the head of the training institution, 
the Government may require him to undergo such further training as it deems fit. 
 
5.  Probationer missing the Final Passing Out Examination: If after 
completing his training to the satisfaction of the head of training institution, a probationer 
is prevented by ill health from taking in full or in part the Final Passing Out Examination, 
the Government may arrange for him to be examined specially and if such probationer 
fails to take the Final Passing Out Examination arranged for him specially, he shall 
render his appointment liable to termination without notice‖; 
 
6. 
Probationer failing to qualifying in the Final Passing Out 
Examination:(1) A probationer who fails to qualify in the Final Passing Out 
Examination shall have his increments withheld until such time he qualifies such 
examination. 
 
(2) 
A probationer who does not qualify in the Final Passing Out Examination 
shall: 
(a) 
lose his one increment if he fails in the first attempt. 
(b) 
be relegated in seniority to the bottom of his batch if he fails in the second 
attempt;  
(c) 
be allowed fourth attempt as a matter of grace to qualify the FPOE; and 
(d) 
be discharged from the service under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 6 
of the Civil Servants Act, 1973 if he fails in the ***fourth attempt:  
 
@“Provided that the Government may, as a matter of grace provide the probationers 
who could not qualify in their Final Passing Out Examination upto the 31st December, 2002, 
an additional chance to appear in the Final Passing Out Examination on such date and at 
such place as it may notify, and if a probationer does not qualify in the examination or fails to 
avail of the additional chance, he shall be removed from service.” 
                                                          
 ―Income Tax Group‖ renamed as ―Inland Revenue Service‖ and ―Customs and Excise Group‖ renamed as 
―Pakistan Customs Service‖. 
 Added vide S.R.O 771(I)/2006 dated 24-07-2006. 
 Inserted/Subs. vide S.R.O. No.257(I)/2011 dated 15-03-2011. 
@ Added vide S.R.O 275(I)/2002 dated 17-05-2002.  

Page -78                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-2                                                     
 
 
(3) 
Absence from the Final Passing Out Examination, without permission of 
the Government shall be deemed to be a failure to qualifying in that examination. 
 
7. Seniority: (1)The seniority of the probationers shall be determined by the 
appointing authority after Final Passing Out Examination. 
 
(2) 
Inductees who join the initial training programme shall be given notional 
marks in a manner that each inductee has the same marks as the senior most probationer 
of the occupational group in which the inductee has been inducted. 
 
(3) 
Inductees who join a specialized training programme directly shall be 
given notional marks equal to the marks obtained by the senior most probationer of the 
occupational groups including the marks in the initial training programme. 
 
(4) 
For the purpose of determining the inter-se-seniority of the probationers 
who commence their training with initial training programme the marks obtained by a 
probationer in the competitive examination of the Commission or his notional marks, as 
the case may be, shall be added to the marks obtained by him in the initial training 
programme, specialized training programme and the marks obtained by qualifying the 
Final Passing Out Examination in his first attempt. 
 
(5) 
For the purpose of determining the inter-se-seniority of the inductees who 
commence their training with the initial training programme or a specialized training 
programme, the notional marks given to such an inductee and the marks obtained by him 
in the initial training programme and specialized training programme, as the case may be, 
shall be added to the marks obtained by him by qualifying the Final Passing Out 
Examination in the first attempt. 
 
8. 
Probation: The period of probation of a probationer shall be two years or 
for such period as the Government may extend for successful completion of training 
programme. 
 
9. 
Bond: A probationer shall, before the commencement of the training, 
execute a Bond, with a surety, to refund in the event of his failing to complete his training 
or resigning from his service during the period of training or within three years thereafter, 
all such amounts paid to him or spent in connection with his training. 
 
10. 
Penalty:—(1)A probationer who fails to comply with the provisions of 
these rules, or to obey any orders which he may receive from the appointing authority, or 
from the Provincial Government under which he is serving, or from the head of 
institution or from any faculty member of the training institution or an officer under 
whom he may be receiving field training, or who neglects his probationary studies, or is 
guilty of conduct unbecoming of an officer shall be liable for removal from service or to 
such other action as the appointing authority may direct. 
 
(2) 
Before a probationer is removed from service he shall be given an 
opportunity to show cause. 
 
11. 
Over-riding effect: The provisions of these rules shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything contained in any other rule or rules for the time being in force 
with regard to any occupational group or service. 
                                                          
 Added vide S.R.O 766(I)/2001 dated 06-11-2001. 

CHAPTER-2                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page -79                                                             
 
 
 
12. 
Repeal: 
The Civil Service of Pakistan (Probation, Training and 
Seniority) Rules, 1954, are hereby repealed (and all such other rules relating to the 
subject are hereby repealed). 
 
3.2 
Occupational Groups and Services  
(Final Passing Out Examination) Rules, 2003 
S.R.O 115 (KE)/2003: In exercise of powers conferred by Section 7-A read with 
Section 10 of the FPSC, Ordinance, 1977, the Chairman, FPSC, with the approval of the 
Federal Government has made the following rules for regulating the conduct of Final 
Passing Out Examination of Probation of different Occupational Group and Services. 
 
1. 
Short Title and Commencement-(1) These rules may be called the 
Occupational Groups and Services (Final Passing Out Examination) Rules, 2003. 
 
(2) 
These rules shall come into force at once. 
 
2. 
Definitions- In these rules unless there is anything repugnant in the 
subject or context:— 
(i) 
―Government‖ means the Federal Government in Establishment Division. 
(ii) 
―Commission‖ means the Federal Public Service Commission. 
(iii) ―Examination‖ means to Final Passing Out Examination of Occupational 
Group and Services. 
(iv) ―Probationer‖ means an officer of any of the regularly constituted 
Occupational Group/Service. 
 
3. 
The Commission shall conduct Final Passing Out Examination (herein-
after to be called as examination) of Probationers of the Occupational Groups and 
Services of the Federal Government at the end of Specialized Training Programme run by 
respective controlling departments/training academics of the Occupational Groups and 
Services. 
 
4. 
This examination shall be held once in a year. 
 
5. 
Syllabus Subjects of Examination (1000 marks)- The examination shall 
consist of syllabus/subjects of 1000 marks to be taught at the respective training 
academics, a copy of which shall be provided to the Commission by the controlling 
departments/academics for setting of question papers. 
 
6. 
Passing marks shall be 45% in individual subjects as well as in the 
aggregate. 
 
7. 
The controlling departments/academics shall be responsible to provide to 
the Commission sets of reference books/statutes in papers classified as ―open book 
papers‖ at least three days prior to the commencement of the examination as per number 
of probationers. Reference books/statutes shall be updated before supplying to the 
Commission. 
 
8. 
The controlling departments/academies shall also be responsible to 
provide to the Commission particulars of the Probationers as and when the same are 
required by the Commission. 
 
9. 
Number of attempts-A Probationer shall be required to clear the 
examination in three attempts, failing which the Government shall take action according 

Page -80                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-2                                                     
 
 
to the provisions of Occupational Groups and Services (Probation, Training & Seniority) 
Rules, 1990. 
 
10. 
A Probationer unable to appear at the examination due to any reason 
whatsoever shall take prior permission from the Government and submit a copy thereof 
to the Commission before commencement of examination. 
 
11. 
A probationer who misbehave in the examination or uses unfair means or 
is found guilty of misconduct, his case shall be reported to his controlling department for 
taking action under the Removal from Service (Special Powers) Ordinance, 2000, under 
intimation to the Commission. 
 
12. 
Answer papers in all the subjects of the examination shall be treated as 
secret documents and therefore, shall not be permitted to be seen by the Probationers or 
their representatives nor shall re-examination of answer books/scripts be allowed under 
any circumstances. A Probationer desirous of getting his marks awarded by the examiner, 
re-counted/re-checked may submit his request for the purpose within one month from the 
dated of announcement of result alongwith a Treasury Challan of Rs. 100/- per paper as 
fee for re-checking/re-counting of marks. Thereafter, no such request shall be entertained. 
 
4.1 
Determination of Seniority/Length of Service 
of All Occupational Groups and Services 
  
In pursuance of the Islamabad High Court‘s Judgment dated 07-12-2017 read 
with Short Order dated 31-10-2017 in Writ Petition No. 2557 of 2017, Estt. Division‘s 
O.M No. 1/3/2014-T.V dated 26-12-2016 on the above cited subject is withdrawn ab-
initio.  
 
2. 
As per decision of the Islamabad High Court, ―on the strength of already 
competed CTP a repeater with improved score will not be allowed seniority on the basis 
of the same and seniority has to be fixed amongst new batch in a particular group. 
However any repeater (candidate) showing his intent to improve score in CTP is allowed 
to join the same.‖ 
 
3. 
As a result of Islamabad High Court Order dated 31-10-2017, the practice 
prior to issuance of Establishment Division‘s O.M mentioned above stands restored. As 
such, those candidates who change their occupational group as a result of repeating CSS 
CE will not repeat CTP, continue their posting in their former occupational group/service 
and join their new occupational group/service on the commencement of their respective 
STPs only alongwith their batch mates of the new occupational group/service. This will 
apply to the officers who are presently repeating the ongoing 45th CTP.  
 
4. 
No officer will be allowed to join STP of their new occupational 
Group/Service with the senior batch of any previous CTP to ensure comparative merit.  
 
5. 
This O.M. supersedes all previous O.Ms in conflict with the above stated 
position to the extent indicated above.  
 
6. 
  Controlling Ministries/Divisions/Departments of various Occupational 
Groups/Services are advised to follow the above mentioned guidelines.  
  
[Authority.— Establishment Division‘s O.M.No.5/6/2017-T.V dated 01-02-2018]. 
                                                          
 Removal from Service (Special Powers) Ordinance,2000 has been repealed vide Section 2(1) of the Act No. 
III of 2010.  

CHAPTER-2                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page -81                                                             
 
 
 
4.2 
Determination of Inter-se-Seniority of  
Officers of All Occupational Groups 
 
Refer to the subject above and to state that in light of Occupational Groups and 
Services (Probation, Training and Seniority) Rules,1990, a number of queries have been 
received by this Division regarding determination of inter-se-seniority. According to sub-
rule 4 of Rule 7 of Occupational Groups and Services (Probation, Training and Seniority) 
Rules,1990 inter-se-seniority of probationers is determined on the basis of aggregate of 
following marks obtained by the probationers.  
i) 
Marks obtained in the competitive examination of FPSC or notional marks 
(in case of inductees as per Rules 7(2); 
ii) 
Marks obtained in the initial training program (CTP) or notional marks (in 
case of inductees as per Rules 7(3); 
iii) 
Marks obtained in the specialized training program (STP); 
iv) 
Marks obtained by qualifying in Final Passing Out Examination in the 
‗first attempt‘. 
 
2. 
A question has arisen as to how the seniority of those probationers should 
be fixed who are not able to qualify the Final Passing Out Examination in the first and 
second attempt. Matter is considered in Establishment Division and clarified as under:— 
(a) 
A probationer failing to qualify FPOE in first attempt will only have 
increments withheld while his/her seniority will not be affected so long as 
he/she passes in second attempt. To determine inter-se-seniority aggregate 
marks obtained (as stated in sub paras i-iv above) will be used to calculate 
the probationer‘s placement in the seniority list. 
(b) 
A probationer who fails to qualify FPOE in second attempt but does it in 
third attempt will be relegated to the bottom of the seniority list 
irrespective of aggregate marks obtained. 
 
3. 
Ministries/Divisions/Departments concerned of all Occupational Groups 
and Services should follow the above mentioned guidelines to determine inter-se-
seniority of the probationers in future. 
[Authority:— Establishment Division‘s O.M.No.1/3/2014-T.V dated 21-04-2014]. 
 
4.3 
Determination of Inter-se-Seniority of Officers of 
All Occupational Groups and Services 
 
Refer to the subject cited above and to state that in continuation to this 
Division‘s O.M. No.1/3/2014-T.V dated 21-04-2014, it is clarified that inter-se-seniority 
of probationers within a batch will be determined as per para 2 of the O.M. ibid from the 
date of insertion of Rule 6(2) in Occupational Groups and Services (Probation, Training 
and Seniority) Rules,1990 vide SRO 257(I)/2011 dated 15-03-2011. 
 
2. 
With regard to queries received by this Division on determination of inter-
se-seniority of probationers who are allowed deferment from Common Training Program, 
the Competent Authority is pleased to inform that in such cases inter-se-seniority of 
probationers, henceforth, will be fixed at the bottom of the batch with which the 
probationer undergoes CTP. It is further stated that while granting deferment a note to 
this effect should be clearly communicated to the probationary officer to bring it to 
his/her notice. 

Page -82                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-2                                                     
 
 
 
3. 
Any O.M. in conflict with the above stated rule position is hereby 
superseded. 
[Authority:- Establishment Division‘s O.M.No.1/3/2014-T-V dated 05-03-2015]. 
 
4.4 
Determination of Length of Service  
in Case of Repeaters 
 
Refer to the subject cited above and to state that following a number of queries 
received, the matter of length of service in case of CSS Competitive Examination 
repeaters, already serving in the various Occupational Groups and Services (Probation, 
Training and Seniority) Rules,1990 was considered in this Division. 
 
2. 
It has been decided that in order to bridge anomalies in the length of 
service between repeaters and their newly recruited batch mates, any officer-probationary 
or otherwise-who repeats CSS Competitive Examination and as a result changes his/her 
Occupational Group/Service, will also repeat Common Training Program with the batch 
the change has been effected. Further, length of service in the previous Group/Service 
will not be considered for the purpose of promotion in the new Occupational 
Group/Service being non-cadre service in light of Section 9 of Civil Servants Act,1973. 
 
[3. For the purpose of determining inter-se-seniority in the light of Rule 7(4) 
of Occupational Groups and Services (Probation, Training and Seniority) Rules,1990 
marks obtained by a probationer in the latest/repeated CTP will be considered.]   
 
4. 
Controlling Ministries/Divisions/Departments of the various Occupational 
Groups/Services should follow the abovementioned guidelines for consideration in case 
of repeaters.  
[Authority:- Establishment Division‘s O.M. No.2/3/2015-T-V dated 17-03-2015]. 
 
4.5 
Determination of Inter-se-Seniority of Officers of  
All Occupational Groups and Services 
 
Refer to the subject cited above and to convey the following decisions taken by 
the competent authority:— 
a. 
[All cases pending or future of probationers / officers received for 
determination of seniority due to deferment will have seniority fixed with 
the batch, these probationers/officers undergo CTP and not their original 
CSS batch. Accordingly, all past cases that have been decided otherwise 
i.e., seniority fixed with original CSS batch will be reverted to bring these 
at par with the new policy issued vide Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 
1/3/2014-.T-V dated 05-03-2015. 
b. 
If a probationer is granted deferment after joining CTP with original CSS 
batch, his/her seniority will be fixed with the batch he/she undergoes/ 
complete the CTP.] 
                                                          
 Subs. vide Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 2/3/2015-T-V dated 15-03-2016. 
Note:— 
 
Paras a & b of Establishment Division‟s O.M No. 1/3/2014-T.V dated 23-09-2015 were substituted vide 
Establishment Division‟s O.M No. 1/3/2014-T.V dated 26-12-2016 from ab-initio. On the directions of 
Islamabad High Court vide Writ Petition No. 2557 of 2017 dated 07-12-2017 which was  withdrawn and stands 
restored to original status vide Establishment Division‟s O.M No. 5/6/2017-T.V  dated 01-02-2018. 

CHAPTER-2                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page -83                                                             
 
 
c. 
Marks of first attempt of FPOE minus marks of failed subject will be 
considered for the purpose of inter-se-seniority. The same principle is 
adopted in the CSS optional papers result. The illustration below explains 
the issue further.  
Let us assume:— 
(i) 
Total Marks of FPOE - 
1000 
(ii) 
Passing Marks 
- 
50% 
Paper 
Total Marks 
Marks Obtained 
Remarks 
A. 
100 
60 
Passed 
B. 
100 
60 
Passed 
C. 
100 
60 
Passed 
D. 
100 
60 
Passed 
E. 
100 
60 
Passed 
F. 
100 
60 
Passed 
G. 
100 
60 
Passed 
H. 
100 
60 
Passed 
I. 
100 
60 
Passed 
J. 
100 
30 
Passed 
Total 
1000 
570 
Passed 
 
(iii) 
Total marks including marks of failed subject i.e. J = 
570 
(iv) 
Total marks excluding marks of failed subject i.e. J=  
540 
(v) 
In order to determine inter-se-seniority, 540 marks will be added to 
the CSS,CTP and STP marks. Hence, as already explained and as 
further illustrated in the column below, 1900 marks will determine 
an individual‘s seniority:— 
Exams 
Total Marks 
Marks 
Obtained 
Remarks 
CSS 
1400 
800 
Passed 
CTP  
500 
300 
Passed 
STP 
600 
350 
Passed 
FPOE 
1000 
540 
Failed in one subject in first attempt 
Total 
3500 
1990 
 
 
 
2. 
Any O.M/O.Ms in conflict with the above stated position is/are hereby 
superseded to this extent.  
[Authority:- Establishment Division‘s O.M.No.1/3/2014-T-V dated 23-09-2015]. 

Page -84                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-2                                                     
 
 
 
4.6 
Determination of Inter-se-Seniority of  
Probationers of All Occupational Groups  
and Services who Repeat Their CTP Due  
to Unsatisfactory Performance  
 
Refer to the subject cited above and to convey the following decisions taken by 
the Competent Authority:—  
 
a. 
 If a probationer is asked to repeat his CTP due to unsatisfactory 
performance his seniority will be fixed with the batch he successfully 
completes his CTP. However, for the purpose of pay fixation his length of 
service will be considered from date of joining of original (first) CTP. 
 
b. 
In case of un-satisfactory performance even during the second CTP, his 
service will be liable to be terminated.  
    [Authority.— Establishment Division‘s O.M.No.2/3/2015-T.V dated 22-10-2015]. 
4.7 
Determination of Length of  
Service in Case of Repeaters 
 
Refer to Establishment Division‘s O.M.No.2/3/2015-T-V dated 17-03-2015 on 
the subject above. In compliance with the order of Lahore High Court direction dated 22-
05-2015 in a Writ Petition No.9837 of 2012, the Secretary Establishment Division is 
pleased to issue following order:— 
In the past cases of repeaters of CSS and re-allocation to another 
Occupational Group the length of service of an officer for all future 
appointments/promotions will be considered from the date of 
commencement of CTP of that particular batch.  
 
2. 
All Ministries/Divisions/Departments/Services controlling the Occupational 
Groups/Services are requested to extend benefit of above order to all those officers who 
repeated CSS and as a consequence directly joined STP of the group/service to which 
he/she is re-allocated.  
[Authority:- Establishment Division‘s O.M. No.2/3/2015-T-V dated 14-01-2016]. 
4.8 
Determination of Length of Service  
in case of Repeaters 
Refer to Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 2/3/2015-T-V dated 17-03-2015 and 
even number dated 14-01-2016 on the subject cited above.  
 
2. 
It is explained that in order to bridge anomalies in the length of service 
between repeater of CSS and their newly recruited batch mates, it was decided vide O.M 
dated 17-03-2015 that any officer probationary or otherwise, who repeaters CSS and as a 
result changes his/her Occupational Group/Service will also repeat CTP with the batch 
the change has been affected. Further, length of service in previous group will not be 
considered for the purpose of promotion in new occupational group being non-cadre service.  

CHAPTER-2                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page -85                                                             
 
 
 
3. 
In the past cases, whereby, a probationer who repeated CSS but not 
repeated CTP and directly joined the STP of his/her Occupation Group/Service, the 
length of service will be counted from date of start of CTP of batch with which he/she 
repeated the CSS and not his/her previous CSS/CTP. The illustration below will further 
explain the issue:— 
 
4. 
Let us assume:—   
 
i) 
Mr. A was previously allocated to PSP on the basis of CSS CE-2013.  
 
 
His CTP started on 01-10-2013. 
 
ii) 
Mr. A repeated CSS CE in 2014 and was allocated to PAS. CTP of  
 
 
his new batch mates started on 01-10-2014. 
 
iii) 
Mr. A did not join the CTP of PAS started on 01-10-2014 and directly 
joined the STP of PAS started on 15-04-2015. 
 
iv) 
Length of Service of Mr. A in PAS for promotion/future appointments 
will be counted from 01-10-2014 (date of start of CTP of his new batch 
mates). 
 
v) 
Length of service of Mr. A in PSP (previous group) will not be 
considered for the purpose of promotion in new occupational group being 
non-cadre service.  
[Authority:- Establishment Division‘s O.M. No.2/3/2015-T-V dated 15-03-2016]. 
 
4.9 
Determination of Inter-se-Seniority when  
Specialized Training Programme (STP) is 
Deferred/Repeated 
 
Refer to subject cited above and to convey the following decision taken by the 
competent authority:— 
i) 
Deferment of STP shall be granted only on compelling medical grounds. 
ii) 
There shall be no change in inter-se-seniority of the probationary 
officer(s) in case of deferment of STP other than change due to 
marks/evaluation in STP contributing towards seniority alongwith other 
determinants. It will be fixed with the same batch the probationary 
officer(s) completed the CTP.  
iii) 
All training institutes should be informed that: 
a) 
No probationer will be allowed to repeat the entire STP, except in 
the case of deferment on compelling medical grounds.  
b) 
In case of performance below desired level a probationary 
officer(s) may  be asked to attend extra classes; detained for a 
specified period and in extreme negligence/misconduct a case may 
be moved for removal from service. In such cases, the report on 
the conduct and performance of a probationary officer(s) should be 
periodically shared with the Establishment Division prior to 
sending the case for termination from service.  

Page -86                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-2                                                     
 
 
c) 
Instances of bad conduct may be elaborated in the pen picture 
provided by the training institute.  
iv) 
In case of not qualifying the examination(s) of STP the probationary 
officer may be retained for such period so as to qualify the failed subjects 
but without any effect to the inter-se-seniority, other than change due to 
marks/evaluation in STP contributing towards seniority alongwith other 
determinants.  
v) 
A probationary officer shall be allowed: 
a) 
Seven days casual leave during STP. 
b) 
In addition to these casual leave he/she may be entitled to a 
cumulative maximum of 30 days medical leave but on the 
recommendation of a Special Medical Board.  
[Authority:— Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 4/11/2014 T-III dated 01-12-2015. 
 
4.10 
Section Officers' (Probation, Training 
 and Seniority) Rules,1964 
 
In exercise of the powers conferred by paragraph (a) of clause  (2)  of  Article  
178  of  the  Constitution, the President is pleased to make the following rules, namely:— 
1. 
These Rules may be called the Section Officers' (Probation, Training and 
Seniority) Rules, 1964. 
2. 
These Rules shall apply to persons recruited as Section Officers on the 
basis of a competitive examination held by the Commission. 
3. 
In these rules, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context:- 
(a) 
"Commission" means the Central Public Service Commission; 
(b) 
"the Government" means the **Central Government; 
(c) 
"Probationer" means a person appointed as Section Officer on 
probation until the period of his probation ends. 
 
4. 
(1) Every person selected for appointment as Section Officer on the basis 
of a competitive examination held by the Commission shall be appointed on probation. 
 
(2) 
Subject to the provisions of sub-rule (4) of rule 8 and rule 9, the period of 
probation of a probationer shall be two years unless the Government, in any case, extends 
it by a further period or periods not exceeding one year in the aggregate. 
                                                          
 Constitution of 1962. 
 Federal. 

CHAPTER-2                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page -87                                                             
 
 
 
(3) 
The services of a probationer may at any time be terminated without 
assigning any reason therefor, and shall be terminated if he does not successfully 
complete his period of probation. 
 
5. 
(1) Every Probationer shall undergo training at such institutions, at such 
places, and for such periods as the Government may decide, in consultation with the 
Commission. 
 
(2) 
The curricula for training shall be such as may be prescribed by the 
Government in consultation with the Commission. 
 
6. 
The officers under whom a probationer is trained or works for any period 
shall prepare and submit to the Government a confidential report in respect of such 
probationer on his work, conduct and performance during such period. 
 
7. 
(1) The annual increment of a probationer may be withheld for such period 
as the Government may direct if he fails to qualify in any of the examinations referred to 
in rules 8 and 10, or if the Government considers his work, conduct, or performance 
unsatisfactory.  
 
(2) 
The withholding of increments under this rule shall not affect a 
probationer's future increments. 
 
8.  
(1) Every probationer shall, after the conclusion of his institutional 
training, be required to qualify at an examination to be held by the Commission. 
 
(2) 
The examination shall be in such subjects, carrying, in the aggregate, a 
maximum of one thousand marks as the *Central Government may prescribe specifying the 
distribution of marks among the various subjects. 
 
(3) A probationer who fails to qualify in any subject or subjects in an 
examination referred to in sub-rule (1) shall be allowed two more chances to appear at the 
examinations to be held subsequently by the Commission in such subject or subjects. 
 
*(4) If a probationer fails to qualify in all the subjects of the examination 
referred to in sub-rule (2) even after having been allowed the subsequent chances as 
provided in sub-rule (3), his services shall be terminated except in the case of a 
probationer who has failed to qualify in one subject only, in which case he will be 
reduced in seniority and placed at the bottom of the batch with which he appears in the 
examination in his third chance and forfeit one increment for a period of one year. 
 
(5) 
If any probationer is prevented by sickness or any other adequate cause 
from appearing in the whole or part of the examinations referred to in sub-rule (1) or (3) 
the Government may arrange for him to be specially examined in any or all of the 
subjects prescribed for such examinations after such interval as it may, after consulting 
the Commission and having regard to the circumstances of the case, consider suitable. 
 
9. 
(1) The period of probation of a probationer shall not end until he has fully 
qualified in the examinations referred to in rules 8 and 10 has earned satisfactory 
confidential reports under rule 6. 
                                                          
 Subs. vide Estt. Division‘s Notification No.9/2/66-C.III(B), dated 28-12-1972. 

Page -88                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-2                                                     
 
 
 
(2) 
Every probationer shall, before commencement of his training, execute a bond 
in the form prescribed by the Government with one surety to refund all moneys paid to him or 
spent in connection with his training, as may be determined by the President, in the event of 
his resigning the service during the period of probation or within 3 years thereafter. 
 
10. 
After he has completed his institutional training, a probationer shall be 
posted to such Ministry, Division or other office as the Government may direct, and shall 
there perform the duties allotted to him, and pass such departmental examinations by 
such standards as the Government may prescribe in this behalf. 
 
11. 
(1) All persons to whom these rules apply and who have been appointed 
on the basis of the same examination shall rank in seniority amongst themselves in the 
descending order of the sum of the marks obtained by them in (i) the competitive 
examination on the basis of which they were selected for appointment; and (ii) the first 
attempt in the examination held under sub-rule (1) of rule 8. 
 
(2) For the purposes of the fixation of the seniority of a probationer whose case 
falls within sub-rule (5) of rule 8, the Government may, in consultation with the 
Commission, pass such orders as it may consider equitable. 
 
12. The service of a probationer shall count for leave and pension from the date 
of his first joining an institution for training under rule 5. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s Notification No. S.R.O.90(R), dated 2-9-1964]. 
4.11 
Fixation of ‘Inter-se-Seniority’ of Section Officers 
Appointed by Direct Recruitment 
 
Principles regarding the fixation of inter-se-seniority of Section Officers 
appointed by direct recruitment on the basis of competitive examinations conducted by 
the Federal Public Service Commission are contained in the Section Officers (Probation, 
Training and Seniority) Rules, 1964. 
 
2. 
A question has arisen whether the inter-se-seniority of Section Officers 
appointed on the basis of competitive examinations held in 1960, 1961 and 1962 should 
also be fixed in accordance with the principles mentioned above or it should be fixed 
according to the positions obtained by them in the competitive examination. 
 
3. 
It was mentioned in the notice issued by the Federal Public Service 
Commission for the 1960 examination that the seniority of candidates in question would be 
according to their order of merit in the competitive examination. Furthermore, no mention 
about the fixation of inter-se-seniority, or about Seniority Rules which were then to be 
framed, was made in the notices for the 1961 and 1962 examinations and the Section 
Officers (Probation, Training and Seniority) Rules, 1964, did not prescribe the principles of 
seniority, with retrospective effect, for Section Officers appointed on the basis of those 
examinations. 
 
4. 
It has therefore, been decided that the inter-se-seniority of candidates 
appointed on the basis of 1960, 1961 and 1962 examinations should be fixed according to 
their order of merit in the competitive examinations. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 1/21/64-C.III, dated 20-8-1965]. 

CHAPTER-2                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page -89                                                             
 
 
 
4.12 
Seniority of Joint Secretaries and Holders of 
Former Senior Administrative Grade 
 
According to para 10 of the Establishment Division Office Memorandum No. 
2/2/75-ARC, dated 21st February, 1975, the seniority of Joint Secretary which is a post in BPS 
20 will be determined from the date of his continuous regular officiation in BPS 20. Some 
doubt seems to exist about the correct interpretation of this provision. The provision is 
explained below. 
 
2. 
Posts in which was formerly Senior Administrative Grade were placed in 
National Pay Scale No.20 with effect from 1st March, 1972. Therefore, the holders of 
Senior Administrative Grade could not be said to be in Grade 20 earlier than 1st March, 
1972. Consequently, the seniority of an officer who had been holding a post in Senior 
Administrative Grade and was later appointed as Joint Secretary would be reckoned from 
1st March, 1972, or the date of appointment as Joint Secretary, whichever is earlier. 
[Authority.-Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.1/1/75-ARC-II, dated 4-4-1973]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page -90                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-2                                                     
 
 
III. CHANGE OF OCCUPATIONAL  
GROUPS/SERVICES 
 
5.1 
Change of Occupational Groups/Services  
 
Allocation to various occupational groups/services are made on the basis of 
competitive examinations conducted annually by the Federal Public Service Commission 
(FPSC). While recommending candidates for allocations to different groups/services, the 
FPSC takes into consideration the merit position, number of vacancies available, 
regional/provincial quota, suitability and preferences of candidates.  
 
2. 
Although change of occupational group is not admissible under the rules, a 
number of applications/representations are being received in the Establishment Division 
requesting for change from one occupational group to another after the allocation has 
been made in accordance with the laid down procedure.  
   
  
 
3. 
It has, therefore, been decided with the approval of the competent 
authority that Ministries/Divisions/Provincial Governments should not forward 
applications/ representations relating to change of occupational groups to the 
Establishment Division. 
 
4. 
All Ministries/Divisions/Provincial Governments are requested to comply 
with these instructions so as to reduce the problems arising out of numerous requests for 
change of groups and in keeping with the principles of sound personnel management. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M.No. 1/4/88-T.V(Pt.XIII), dated 24-4-1990]. 
 
 
5.2 
Change of Occupational Group Prohibition 
Against Mutual  Exchange 
 
The Prime Minister has been pleased to direct that any request(s)/ application(s) 
for mutual exchange of officers from one Occupational Group/Service to another shall 
not be entertained. It has also been decided that Government Servants (Applications for 
Services and Posts) Rules, 1966 be strictly observed, without exception. 
[Authority:—Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No. 1/4/98-T.V. dated 19-11-1998] 
 
5.3 
Initial Training of the Probationers  
Appointed to various Groups/Services 
on the Results of the Annual Competitive  
Examination held by the FPSC 
 
In partial modification of Establishment Division's Office Memoranda (listed at 
Serial No. 1-11 at Annex) the government has decided that, notwithstanding the 
provisions relating to the training of probationers of occupational groups/services 
contained in the said office memoranda, the probationers of one or more groups/services 
may henceforth be required to undergo and successfully complete their initial training 
separately or collectively, as the case may be at one or more training institutions and 
places, as may be specified by government from time to time. It may be further stated that 

CHAPTER-2                         ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page -91                                                             
 
 
initial training shall be followed by respective departmental specialized or on the job 
training as the case may be for these occupational groups/services. 
 
2. 
The probationer who fails to comply with the provisions of these rules or 
to obey any order which he/she obtains from government or from Director/Head of the 
training institution or from any other duly constituted authority or who neglects his 
probationary studies, or is guilty of conduct unbecoming an officer of an occupational 
group/service shall be liable to removal from group/service or to such other action as the 
competent authority may direct as provided for under the [Government Servants 
(Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 1973.] 
 
3. 
This Office Memorandum shall also apply to probationers appointed to 
other groups not specified in the Annex to this O.M. including Railway (Commercial & 
Trade) Group, who are appointed on the results of the annual competitive examination 
held by the FPSC. 
[Authority.—Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 1/36/82-T.V, dated 8-4-1990]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
 Now Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules,2020. 

Page -92                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-2                                                     
 
 
(ANNEX) 
 
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE 
TRAINING OF PROBATIONERS 
 
Name of the  
Reference to the paragraph and the Estab. 
Group/Service  
Division O.M. containing the provisions. 
 
1. 
Accounts Group 
Paragraph 4(e) of O.M.No.1/2/74-ARC, dated 23-1-1974  
 
 
constituting the Group*. 
 
2.  Commerce & 
Paragraph 4 of O.M. No. 6/2/75-ARC, dated 8-5-1975 
 
Trade Group 
constituting the Group. 
 
3.   Customs & Excise 
Paragraph 3 of O.M. No.5/2/75-ARC, dated 9-5-1975 
 
Group 
constituting the Group. 
 
4. District  Management 
Paragraph 3 of O.M.No.2/2/74-ARC, dated  23-2-1974 Group
 
constituting the Group. 
 
 
5.  Foreign Service 
Paragraph 3 of O.M.No.3/2/74-ARC, dated 8-4-1974 
 
of Pakistan 
constituting the service/Group. 
 
6.  @Income Tax Group 
Paragraph 3 of O.M. No.4/2/75-ARC,dated9-5-1975  
        
constituting the Group. 
 
7.   Information  
Paragraph 4 of O.M. No. 2/8/75-ARC, dated 17-6-1977 Group 
 
constituting the Group. 
 
 
 
8.   Military Lands  
Paragraph 4 of O.M. No.9/2/75-ARC, dated 11-5-1975 
      and Cantonment 
constituting the Group. 
      Group 
 
9.  Office  
Paragraph 8(a) of O.M.No.1/2/75-ARC, dated 27.1.1975 
Management Group 
constituting the Group. 
      
10. @@Police Group 
Paragraph 3 of 3/2/75-ARC, dated 31.5.1975 
        
constituting the Group/Service. 
 
 
11. Postal Group 
Paragraph 3 of O.M. No. 3/2/75-ARC, dated 30.5.1975   
 
 
constituting the Group. 
 
____________ 
 
                                                          
Pakistan Audit and Accounts Service. 
Renamed as ―Pakistan Customs Service‖ vide Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.6/2/2009 CP-II dated 12-09-2009. 
Renamed as ―Pakistan Administrative Service‖ vide Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.6/3/2012 CP-II dated 21-05-2012 
@ Now ―Inland Revenue Service‖ vide Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.6/2/2009 CP-II dated 12-09-2009. 
@@Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 3/2/75-ARC dated 31-05-1975 constituting the Police Group is rescinded 
 
vide Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 3/1//84-CP.2 dated 05-11-1985. 

CHAPTER 3  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RECRUITMENT & INDUCTION  
 (93-94) 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page -95                                                        
 
 
 
Sl.No. 
 
 
Chapter Contents 
Page  
No. 
 
RECRUITMENT 
I. 
RECRUITMENT POLICY  
 
 
1.1 
Recruitment Policy for the Federal Services/Autonomous 
 
Bodies/ Corporations-2014 ......................................................... 
101-103 
 
1.2 
Mechanism to Ensure Merit Based Recruitment in the 
Ministries/Divisions/Sub-ordinate Offices/Autonomous/ Semi-
Autonomous Bodies/Corporations/Companies / Authorities .........  
103-105 
 
1.3 
Updation/Revision of Recruitment Rules of Various Posts of 
Ministries/Divisions/Departments under the Federal Government  
1.4 
Checking 
the 
Genuineness 
of 
Educational 
Certificates/ 
Qualification etc. ...........................................................................  
106-107  
108 
 
1.5 
Selection Procedure of Chief Executives in Key Public Sector 
Enterprises ..................................................................................... 
109-112 
 
1.6 
 Procedure for Making Recruitment from Abroad .......................... 
113 
 
II. FRAMING OF RECRUITMENT RULES 
 
 
 
2.1 
Framing of Recruitment Rules ................................................... 
114-115 
 
2.2 
Provision of Supporting Information/Documents with Draft 
Recruitment Rules for Obtaining Concurrence of Establishment 
Division or Framing /Amendment of Recruitment Rules and Up-
gradation/Re-designation of Posts .................................................  
115-118 
 
2.3 
Detailed Recruitment Rules Not Necessary: only Method of 
Appointment, Qualifications, Experience etc. to be Notified ............  
118-120 
 
2.4 
Consultation with F.P.S.C. in respect of Recruitment Rules ......... 
121 
 
2.5 
Framing of Recruitment Rules: Consultation With FPSC ............. 
121 
 
2.6 
Recruitment Rules for the Posts of Private Secretary (BPS 17) to 
the Secretaries/ Additional Secretaries and Other Officers in BPS 
21/22 Provided with the Services of P.S in the Federal Government 
121-122 
 
2.7 
Recruitment to the Posts of Private Secretaries to the Federal 
Ministers and Ministers of State ................................................... 
 
 
 
122 

Page -96                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          CHAPTER-3 
 
 
 
Sl.No. 
 
 
Chapter Contents 
Page  
No. 
 
 
2.8 
Framing of Recruitment Rules-Making Ad-Hoc Appointments ... 
122 
III. FRAMING OF RECRUITMENT RULES OF PROJECT POSTS 
 
 
3.1 
Waiver of Framing of Recruitment Rules for Project Posts in 
Ministries/Divisions .........................................................................  
123 
 
3.2 
Bar Against Revising Qualifications Prescribed for the Posts in 
the Recruitment Rules ................................................................. 
124 
 
IV. PROVINCIAL / REGIONAL QUOTAS FOR 
RECRUITMENT 
 
 
 
4.1 
Provincial / Regional Quotas for Recruitment to the Civil 
 
Posts under the Federal Government ........................................ 
125 
 
4.2 
Clarification 
Regarding 
Provincial/Regional 
Quotas 
for 
Recruitment to the Civil Posts under the Federal Government ........  
125 
 
4.3 
Provincial 
Representation 
in 
Islamabad 
Capital 
Territory 
Administration ...................................................................................  
126 
 
4.4 
Observance of Provincial/Regional Quota while Making 
Contract Appointments ................................................................. 
126 
 
4.5 
Reservation of 10% Quota for Employment of Women Across-
the-Board in Federal Government Services ................................... 
126-127 
 
4.6 
Reservation of 05% Quota for Employment of Minorities (Non-
Muslims) Across-the-Board in Federal Government Services/ 
Jobs ............................................................................................... 
127-128 
 
4.7 
Regulation of Provincial/Regional Quotas ........................................  
128-129 
 
4.8 
Clarifications Regarding Application of Revised Provincial/ 
Regional Quotas ........................................................................... 
130 
 
4.9 
Isolated Posts – Application Of Provincial/Regional Quotas ....... 
130 
 
4.10 
Recruitment to Civil Posts in the Administration of Gilgit 
Baltistan ........................................................................................ 
131 
 
4.11 
ICT Rights of Persons with Disability Act, 2020 ......................... 
131-146 
 
4.12 
Uniform Instructions on 2% Disability Quota .............................. 
146 
 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page -97                                                        
 
 
 
Sl.No. 
 
 
Chapter Contents 
Page  
No. 
 
V. DETERMINATION OF DOMICILE  
 
5.1 Determination of Domicile .............................................................. 
147 
 
5.2 Determination of Domicile for the Purpose of Appointments 
Against Provincial/Regional Quotas ................................................ 
147-149 
 
5.3 Married Female Candidates - Determination Of Domicile .............. 
149-150 
 
5.4 Candidates Not Required to Show Place of Birth of their Fathers 
for Purposes of Domicile ................................................................. 
150 
 
5.5 Change of Domicile After Entry into Government Service ............. 
150 
VI. COMPETITIVE EXAMINATIONS 
 
6.1 
CSS-Competitive Examination Rules,2019 .......................................  
151-171 
 
6.2 
Section Officer Promotional Examination Rules,2015 ......................  
172-196 
 
6.3 
 Eligibility of Superintendent (BS-17) to in Participate  Section 
Officers Promotional Examinations  
196 
 
6.4 
Appointment by Transfer in Office Management Group (OMG) 
 
(Conduct of examination) Rules,2020 ...............................................  
6.5 
The Provincial Management Services (PMS) and Provincial 
Civil Services (PCS) Induction into Pakistan Administrative 
Service Rules,2020 ........................................................................ 
 
196-218 
 
219-245 
VII. FEDERAL PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION 
 
7.1 
Federal Public Service Commission Ordinance,1977 (No. XLV 
 
of 1977) ........................................................................................ 
246-251 
 
7.2 
Federal 
Public 
Service 
Commission 
(Composition 
and 
 
Condition of  Service) Regulations, 1978 ..................................... 
251-256 
 
7.3 
Federal Public Service Commission(Functions) Rules, 1978 ....... 
257-258 
 
7.4 
Consultation with FPSC in Matters of Appointment ........................  
258-259 
 
7.5 
Consultation with Federal Public Service Commission in Respect 
of Recruitment Rules .........................................................................  
259 
 
7.6 
Procedure for Rejection of the Advice of the F.P.S.C. ................. 
260 
 
7.7 
Supply of Character Rolls to the Commission .............................. 
260 
 
7.8 
Nomination of Departmental Representatives to Assist the 
Commission at the Interviews for Various Posts .......................... 
260-261 
 
7.9 
Variation between views of Departmental Representatives at the 
Interview and Commission's Advertisements for Various Posts 
261-262 
 
7.10 Criteria for Counting of Prescribed Length of Experience for 
Recruitment to Various Posts ....................................................... 
262-263 
 
7.11 
Re-allocation Against the Vacancies Caused by Repeaters/Non-
Joiners ...............................................................................................  
263 
 
 

Page -98                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          CHAPTER-3 
 
 
 
 
Sl. No. 
 
 
Chapter Contents 
Page  
No. 
 
 
7.12 
Withdrawal or Change of Requisition by the Administrative 
Ministries/Divisions/Departments for Posts Already Advertised 
by the Commission ....................................................................... 
263-264 
 
7.13 Validity Period of Waiting/Reserved Merit List for  Making 
Alternate Nominations in the  Cases of Recruitment by Selection  ..  
264 
 
7.14 
Validity Period of Waiting/Reserved Merit List for Making 
Alternate Nomination(s) in the General Recruitment Cases ......... 
264 
 
INDUCTION 
 
 
I. 
INDUCTION  IN SECRETARIAT POSTS 
 
 
8.1 
Eligibility of Officers for Appointment in Secretariat Posts .......... 
265 
 
8.2 
Induction in Secretariat Group as Deputy Secretary (BS-19) ........ 
265-269 
 
8.3 
Induction in Secretariat Group as Joint Secretary (BS-20) ............ 
269-282 
CHAPTER 3 
RECRUITMENT & INDUCTION  
II. 
INDUCTION OF COMMISSIONED OFFICERS AND OTHER RANKS 
RECRUITED OR INDUCTED ON REGULAR OR CONTRACT BASIS IN CIVIL 
POSTS 
 
9.1 
Provisions Relating to Commissioned Officers and Other Ranks 
 
Recruited or Inducted on Regular Basis or on Contract in Civil 
 
Posts- Terms and Conditions .........................................................  
283-285 
 
9.2 
Terms and Conditions of Service of Army Engineer Officers 
transferred to the Survey of Pakistan ..................................................  
285-288 
 
9.3 
Use of Military Ranks by Military Personnel and Designation of Civil 
Employment ........................................................................................  
288 
 
9.4 
Employment of Released/Retired Armed Forces Officers/ Personnel 
in Civil Posts .......................................................................................  
288-289 
 
9.5 
Employment of Armed Forces Officers/Personnel – Provisions in 
Recruitment Rules ...............................................................................  
289 
 
9.6 
Employment of Ex-servicemen in Government Departments against 
Posts in BPS 1-4 ..................................................................................  
289-290 
 
9.7 
Employment of Ex-Servicemen and Pakistan Armed Services Board 
(PASB) ................................................................................................  
290-291 
 
9.8 
Reservation of 50% Vacancies in BPS 1-3 and in BPS 4 of Staff Car 
Driver/Despatch Rider for Armed Forces Personnel ..........................  
291-292 
 
9.9 
Employment of Ex-Servicemen from Other Regions if Locally Not 
Available .............................................................................................  
292 
 
9.10 Submission of Returns in Respect of Employment of Released/ 
Retired Armed Forces Personnel ........................................................  
292 
 
9.11 Induction/Re-employment of Officers of Armed Forces of Pakistan in 
Civil Posts ...........................................................................................  
293-297 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page -99                                                        
 
 
 
Sl.No. 
 
 
Chapter Contents 
Page  
No. 
 
9.12 Application of Instructions for Induction/Re-employment of Armed 
Forces Officers to Autonomous Bodies ..............................................  
297 
 
9.13 Guidelines for Re-employment of Retired Armed Forces Officers  
297-298 
 
9.14 Inclusion of Commissioned Service in Armed Forces in Length of 
Service in Civil Posts ..........................................................................  
299 
 
 
9.15 Secondment/Re-Employment of Armed Forces Officers in Civil ......  
299-300 
 
9.16 Pay Fixation and Seniority of Armed Forces Officers Inducted in Civil 
Posts ........................................................................................................... 
300 
 
9.17 Eligibility of Major/Equivalent Retired on Medical Grounds for 
Induction in Posts in BPS 18/Equivalent ............................................  
300 
 
9.18 Resignation by Armed Forces Officers Inducted in Civil Posts .........  
301 
 
9.19 Pay Fixation of Armed Forces Officers Inducted in Civil Posts ........  
301 
 
9.20 Termination of Contract of Armed Forces Officers in Civil Posts .....  
301-302 
 
9.21 Application of Instructions for Induction/Re-employment of Armed 
Forces Officers in Autonomous Bodies – Amendment in Recruitment 
Rules ...................................................................................................   
302 
 
9.22 Induction/Re-employment of Armed Forces Officers in Civil Posts – 
Specification of Groups and Cadres ...................................................  
302-303 
 
9.23 Induction/Re-employment of Armed Forces Officers in Civil Posts : 
Specification of Groups ......................................................................  
303-304 
 
9.24 Induction of Armed Forces Officers in Civil Posts – Modification in 
Instructions ..........................................................................................  
304-305 
 
9.25 Extension in Re-employment on Contract of Armed Forces Officers 
305 
 
9.26 Induction/Re-Employment Of Armed Forces Officers into Civil Posts
.............................................................................................................  
306-307 
 
9.27 Induction of Armed Forces Officers in Pakistan Administrative 
Service, Police Service of Pakistan and Foreign Service of Pakistan 
BS-17 .............................................................................................  
307 
 
9.28 Re-Employment of Retired Armed Forces Officers in Civil in 
Specified Service Groups/Ministries through Defence Services 
Officers Selection Board (DSOSB) ....................................................  
307 
 
9.29 Constitutions and Functions of the Departmental Promotion 
Committees ....................................................................................  
 
307-308 
 
 
________________ 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -101 
 
 
CHAPTER 3 
RECRUITMENT & INDUCTION  
RECRUITMENT  
I. RECRUITMENT POLICY  
 
1.1 
Recruitment Policy for the Federal Services/ 
 
 
Autonomous Bodies/Corporations-2014 
 
Refer to Establishment Division‘s O.M.No.4/1/93-R-I dated 25-09-2014 
regarding lifting of ban on recruitment under the Federal Government and to state that 
Ministries/Divisions/Attached Departments/Subordinate Offices/Autonomous Bodies/ 
Semi-Autonomous Bodies/Corporations/Companies/Authorities etc. are required to 
follow the recruitment policy as under:—  
(i) 
Recruitment to posts in BPS-16 and above shall continue to be made 
through the Federal Public Service Commission as hithertofore. 
(ii) 
Initial appointment to posts which are required to be made on All 
Pakistan basis shall be made under rule-14 of the Civil Servants 
(Appointment, Promotion & Transfer) Rules, 1973. 
(iii) 
*[Initial appointment to posts in BPS-6 to BPS-15 and equivalent in 
offices which are required to serve only in a particular Province/Region 
shall be filled by appointment of persons domiciled in the 
Province/Region concerned under Rule-15 of the Civil Servants 
(Appointment, Promotion & Transfer) Rules, 1973]. 
(iv) 
[Vacancies in posts in BPS-01 to BPS-05 & equivalent shall 
ordinarily be filled on local basis under Rule-16 of the Civil Servants 
(Appointment, Promotion & Transfer) Rules, 1973].  
(v) 
Initial appointment shall be made strictly in accordance with the 
provisions contained in the Recruitment Rules of the post concerned. In 
the absence of Recruitment Rules, Ministries / Divisions/Attached 
Departments / Subordinate Offices / Autonomous Bodies/Semi-
Autonomous Bodies/ Corporations/ Companies/ Authorities etc. are first 
required to frame the Recruitment Rules and lay down the eligibility 
conditions for such appointments. No recruitment shall be made in the 
absence of approved Recruitment Rules. 
(vi) 
@[NOC from the Surplus Pool of Establishment Division shall continue to 
be obtained for recruitments in Ministries Divisions/ Attached 
                                                          
* Amended vides Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 53/1/2008-SP dated 25-06-2019. 
 Amended vides Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 53/1/2008-SP dated 13-03-2020 
 Subs. vide S.R.O No. 634(I)/2019 dated 17-06-2019. 
@ Amended vide Establishment Division O.M No. 53/1/2019-SP(Pt) dated 04-03-2019. 

Page -102                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
Departments/ Sub-Ordinate Offices: 
Provided that if No Objection Certificate (NOC) is not issued by 
the Establishment Division within (07) working days to the Ministries/ 
Divisions for fresh recruitment, it will be deemed to have been issued.  
All other recruitments including: 
(i) 
Contract/Contingent 
Paid/Project/Specialized 
(including 
MP 
 
  
Scales) Posts; and 
(ii) 
For Autonomous Bodies/Semi-Autonomous Bodies/ Corpora- 
 
 
tions/companies/Authorities shall be exempted from seeking NOC  
 
 
from Establishment Division.]   
(vii) The vacancies in each Ministry/Division/Department/Autonomous Body/ 
Corporation, as per the Provincial/Regional quota etc., shall be advertised 
through widely published National/ Provincial/ Regional newspapers.  
(viii) Minimum of 15 days‘ time limit may be given for receipt of applications. 
(ix) 
Applicants may be required to apply on a prescribed format without being 
asked for copies of educational qualification etc. However, at the time of 
written test/interview, the candidates may be asked to bring with them 
original certificates/documents for satisfaction of the authority. 
(x) 
Regional/Provincial quota, Women quota, Minorities (Non-Muslim) 
quota and Disabled Persons quota, or any other quota prescribed from 
time to time, should expressly and clearly be indicated against the vacant 
post(s) advertised.  
(xi) 
Required qualification and age limit as provided in the recruitment Rules, 
including general age relaxation, should also be clearly laid down in the 
advertisement. 
(xii) Vacancies in posts should be filled only against the approved sanctioned 
strength of the said category. 
(xiii) *[Ministries/ Divisions/ Departments/ Attached Departments/ Sub-ordinate 
Offices/ Autonomous Bodies/ Semi- Autonomous Bodies/ Corporations/ 
Authorities etc. are required to finalize the recruitment within 120 days from the 
date of advertisement.] 
(xiv) Deficiency in the existing Provincial/Regional representation, if any, in 
the Federal Services including Autonomous/Semi-Autonomous Bodies 
may be adjusted. 
(xv) Administrative Ministries/Divisions shall ensure merit and transparency 
in the recruitment process at all levels. 
                                                          
* Amended vide Establishment Division O.M No. 53/1/2019-SP(Pt) dated 04-03-2019. 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -103 
 
 
(xvi) The candidates using or attempting to use any extraneous influence at any 
level shall be liable to be disqualified. 
(xvii) [The advertisement to be published for recruitment may be forwarded by 
the 
concerned 
Ministry/Division 
directly 
to 
Press 
Information 
Department, Information & Broadcasting Division. However, the 
appointing authority of the concerned Ministry/Division/ Department/ 
Organization shall ensure completion of all procedural and codal 
requirements in letter & spirit in line with the Recruitment Policy while 
making recruitment and will be held responsible for illegality if any.]  
[Authority:- Establishment Division‘s O.M.No.F.53/1/2008-SP dated 22nd October, 2014] 
1.2 
Mechanism to Ensure Merit Based Recruitment in the 
Ministries/Divisions/Sub-ordinate Offices/Autonomous/ 
Semi-Autonomous Bodies/Corporations/Companies/ 
Authorities 
 
Refer to Establishment Division‘s O.M of even number dated 22nd October,2014 
regarding recruitment policy for the Federal Services, Autonomous Bodies/Corporations 
and to say that [the Federal Government] is pleased to devise following mechanism, to 
ensure transparency and merit based recruitment in the Ministries / Divisions / Attached 
Departments/Autonomous/Semi-Autonomous 
Bodies 
/ 
Corporations/Companies/ 
Authorities:—     
 
a) 
[*******]  
 
 
 
***[The Initial screening of the applicants may be conducted by the 
 
  
concerned 
Ministries/Divisions/Sub-ordinate 
Offices/Autonomous/ 
 
 
Semi-Autonomous 
Bodies/Corporations/Companies/Authorities 
 
  
themselves till Cabinet Committee give its final decision on the 
 
 
subject.]    
 
@[b) Interview 
 The short listed applicants, as a result of screening test, would be 
interviewed after verification of academic/professional credentials and 
testimonial. The Departmental Selection Committee (DSC) constituted 
vide Rule 2(e) of the Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion & 
Transfer) Rules, 1973 would adjudge the applicant on the following 
criteria for selection:— 
                                                          
 Subs. vide Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 53/1/2008-SP dated 07-08-2019. 
The words ―the Federal Government‖ may be read as ―the Prime Minister‖ vide Establishment Division‘s 
O.M No. F.53/1/2008-SP dated 21-09-2021. 
 Deleted & added vide Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 53/1/2008-SP dated 06-05-2020. 
@ Subs. & amended vide Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 53/1/2008-SP dated 03-03-2015. 

Page -104                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
 
 
- Score in the test may have 70% weightage whereas the weightage of 
interview will be upto 30%. However, it will be upto the concerned 
Ministry/Division etc. to assign more weightage to the written test by 
reducing the weightage assigned to the interview.  
 
 
- The weightage for interview would be allocated by the members of the 
DSC as under:—  
 
 
 
- 
Chairman 
 
 
 
40% 
- 
Two Members  
 
 
30% each 
 
Further the DSC would assess the applicants as under:— 
 
 
 
Relevant qualification/experience  
30% 
 Knowledge/Skill relevancy 
 
40% and 
 Personality/Interpersonal 
 
30% 
 
Communication skills  
 
c) 
Type of Test 
There shall be no screening test for the posts in BS-1 to BS-5 whereas the 
candidates shall only have to qualify particular skill test required for the 
said post.  
However, while considering suitability for the posts in BS-6 and above, 
an objective type test shall be designed giving 20% weightage each to 
Islamic Studies, Pakistan Studies, English, General Knowledge and the 
subject relevant to job. Further, for skilled jobs in BS-6 and above, the 
candidates shall have to qualify particular skill test required for the posts 
in addition to the screening test stated above].   
 
d) 
Autonomous Bodies/Corporations/Companies/Authorities 
The present system of recruitment to MP Scales and Management Grades 
M1 to M3 or equivalent will continue. However, for recruitment to other 
Executive as well as non-Executive grades equitable with government 
BPS, the selection criteria given above be adopted.  
 
[e) 
Appointment on Regular Basis of Contract/Contingent Paid/Daily 
Wage/Project Employees 
 
 
 For the purpose of appointment on regular basis of Contract/ Contingent 
Paid/Daily Wage/Project employees the following criteria shall be 
observed:—  
                                                          
 Inserted vide Establishment Division‘s O.M. No. 53/1/2008-SP dated 11-05-2017. 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -105 
 
 
(i) 
All Contract/Contingent Paid/Daily Wage/Project employees who 
have rendered a minimum Of one year of service, in continuity, as 
on 1-1-2017 (hereinafter referred to as eligible employees) may 
apply for appointment on regular basis in the manner prescribed 
hereinafter provided that the condition of continuity shall not be 
applicable in case of person(s) employed on daily wages who have 
completed at least 365 days service.  
(ii) 
For initial appointment to posts in BS-16 and above, the 
employees shall apply direct to FPSC against relevant/suitable 
vacancies as and when arising for which they are eligible.  
(iii) 
For initial appointment to posts in BS-1 to BS-15, the eligible 
employees may apply as per criteria given vide Establishment 
Division's O.M.No.53/1/2008-SP dated 16-1-2015 and 3-3-2015 
shall be adopted.  
(iv) 
The eligible employees shall be awarded extra marks in interview 
at the rate of one (01) mark for each year of service rendered upto 
a maximum of five (05) marks, on the recommendations of the 
respective selection authorities.  
(v) 
The period served as contract/contingent paid/daily wage/ project 
employee, shall be excluded for the purpose of determination of 
upper age limit in addition to relaxation of upper age limit as per 
existing rules.  
(vi) 
Qualifications prescribed for a post shall be strictly followed. In 
case, a person does not possess the prescribed qualifications/ 
experience for the post he/she is applying for, he/she shall not be 
considered for the same.  
(vii) The employee must be in good mental and bodily health and free 
from any physical defect likely to interfere with the discharge of 
his duties unless appointed against disability quota.  
(viii) The advantage of para 1(e) is a one-time dispensation for all 
contract/ contingent paid/ daily wage/ project employees for their 
eligibility to regular employment.] 
 
2. In order to oversee and monitor the implementation of above mentioned 
mechanism of recruitment in the Ministries/Divisions/ Departments/ Sub-ordinate Offices/ 
Autonomous/Semi-Autonomous Bodies/Corporations/ Companies/Authorities, the following 
monitoring committee shall be constituted in the Establishment Division:— 
   
a) 
Additional Secretary (BS-21)or equivalent 
Chairman  
 
b) 
JS(BS-20) or equivalent 
 
 
Member  
 
c) 
DS (BS-19) or equivalent 
 
 
Member 
 
d) 
SO (BS-17) or equivalent 
 
 
Member/Secretary 
[Authority:- Establishment Division‘s O.M. No.F.53/1/2008-SP dated 16-01-2015]. 

Page -106                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
 
1.3 
Updation/Revision of Recruitment Rules of Various 
Posts of Ministries/Divisions/Departments under the 
Federal Government    
 
Refer to Federal Public Service Commission‘s d.o letter F.No.17-20/2017-RR, 
dated 15th April,2019 (Annexed) wherein it has been stated that commission has 
observed that each year a significant number of posts remain vacant/unfilled due to non-
availability of suitable candidates from respective quotas and fields of education. The 
Commission has further noticed that during the personal hearings of the candidates, who 
file representation against rejection of their candidature on account of not meeting the 
advertised qualifications, that the recruitment rules of various Ministries/Divisions/ 
Departments were either outdated or were not aligned with the new qualification/ 
titles/nomenclature of closely related disciplines/degrees available in the market. The 
Commission feels that we lose good talent available in the market due to the weaknesses 
in existing recruitment rules.  
 
2. 
Further, Commission has also informed that to facilitate the process of 
aligning Recruitment Rules with the latest national qualifications/titles/ standards, FPSC 
has prepared a “Booklet on Qualifications/Titles/Nomenclatures of Academic Degrees 
as offered by HEC recognized Universities in Pakistan”. This information is based on 
the Higher Education Commission‘s ‗Pakistan Qualification Register‘. The purpose of 
this initiative is to consolidate all available degrees at various academic levels (PhD, 
M.Phil, MS. M.Sc,  M.A. BS, B.Sc, B.A etc) in all disciplines/fields of education being 
offered by HEC recognized universities. Besides this, it is also important to consult HEC 
“National Qualifications Framework of Pakistan 2015,” which specifies criteria for the 
use of Titles/Nomenclatures for different academic and professional degrees. Both the 
documents are available/accessible on FPSC website www.fpsc.gov.pk  and also attached 
for ready reference for preparation/revision of recruitment rules.  
 
 
3. 
In view of the above, all Ministries/Divisions/Departments are advised to 
revisit/update 
their 
respective 
Recruitment 
Rules 
by 
including 
the 
latest 
qualifications/nomenclature/ disciplines and fields of experience required to perform the 
job relating to the posts of their Ministry/Division/Department in light of above 
mentioned documents preferably before 30th June,2019 and to process for concurrence of 
the Commission through Establishment Division.  
 
[Authority:— Establishment Division‘s O.M. No. 1/4/2019-R-V dated 02-05-2019.] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -107 
 
 
          ANNEXURE 
(See Sl.No. 1.3) 
 
 F.NO.17-20/2017-RR 
FEDERAL PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION 
AGA KHAN ROAD, F-5/1 
 
Subject:  
UPDATION/REVISION 
OF 
RECRUITMENT 
RULES 
OF 
VARIOUS POSTS OF MINISTRIES/DIVISIONS/ DEPARTMENTS 
UNDER THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT.  
 
Federal Public Service Commission is the apex statutory body responsible for 
recruitment of persons to all Pakistan Services, the Civil Services of the Federation and 
Civil posts in connection with the affairs of the Federation in BS-16 and above or 
equivalent. The Commission has observed that each year a significant number of posts 
remain vacant/unfilled due to non-availability of suitable candidates from respective 
quotas and fields of education. The Commission has further noticed during the personal 
hearings of the candidates, who file representation against rejection of their candidature 
on account of not meeting the advertised qualifications, that the recruitment rules of 
various Ministries/Divisions/Departments were either outdated or were not aligned with 
the new qualifications/titles/nomenclature of closely related disciplines/degrees available 
in the market. The Commission feels that we lose good talent available in the market due 
to the weaknesses in existing recruitment rules.  
2. 
To facilitate the process of aligning Recruitment Rules with the latest 
national qualifications/titles/standards, FPSC has prepared a “Booklet on Qualifications/ 
Titles/Nomenclatures of Academic Degrees as Offered by HEC Recognized 
Universities in Pakistan”.  This information is based on the Higher Education 
Commission‘s ‗Pakistan Qualification Register‘. The purpose of this initiative is to 
consolidate all available degree at various academic levels (PhD, MPhil, MS, M.Sc, M.A. 
BS, B.Sc, B.A etc) in all disciplines/fields of education being offered by HEC recognized 
universities. Besides this, it is also important to consult HEC “National Qualifications 
Framework 
of 
Pakistan 
2015,” 
which 
specifies 
criteria 
for 
the 
use 
of 
Titles/Nomenclatures for different academic and professional degrees. Both the 
documents are available/accessible on FPSC website www.fpsc.gov.pk  and also 
attached for ready reference for preparation/revision of recruitment rules.  
3. 
All Ministries/Divisions/Departments may be directed to revisit their 
respective Recruitment Rules and to include the latest qualifications/nomenclature/ 
disciplines and fields of experience required to perform the job relating to the posts of 
their Ministry/Division/Department in light of the above two documents preferably 
before 30th June 2019 and to process for concurrence of the Commission through 
Establishment Division.       
(Dr. Muhammad Iqbal) 
 Secretary 
Dr. Ijaz Munir 
Secretary, 
Establishment Division 
Government of Pakistan      
 

Page -108                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
 
1.4 
Checking the Genuineness of Educational  
Certificates/Qualifications etc. 
 
Instances have come to the notice of the Federal Government wherein forged 
educational certificates have been submitted by certain persons seeking employment under 
government. It is, therefore, necessary to check thoroughly the genuineness of certificates 
where the bonafides of persons employed after the 15th August, 1947 are in doubt. One 
method of checking is to make a reference to the universities which issued the certificates. If 
this method does not prove successful, cross examination (and other suitable methods which 
may be possible according to the merits of the case) of the individuals concerned by the 
appointing authorities themselves may be resorted to. The candidates concerned may also be 
required to produce two certificates from Gazetted officers in support of their claim to 
educational qualifications. 
 
2. 
 There may also be cases where the certificates produced are genuine but 
there is a reasonable doubt that they do not relate to the persons producing them.  In such 
cases, the matter will have to be referred to the District Police authorities for investigation 
and report. 
 
3. 
 In so far as the competitive examinations conducted by the Federal Public 
Service Commission are concerned, the original age and educational certificates submitted by 
the candidates with their applications are fully checked, and necessary enquiries made in all 
doubtful cases.  But, as regards recruitment by selection, the candidates are not generally 
required to submit their original certificates with their applications. Only attested copies are 
called for. In these cases, it is essential for the appointing authorities to verify the claims of the 
candidates as regards age and educational qualifications in the same manner in which their 
antecedents are verified before appointment. If it is found that a forged certificate has been 
produced or that the individual, producing a certificate, is not the one to whom it was issued, 
suitable disciplinary action must be taken against the person concerned, including dismissal 
from government service, (if the persons are in government service) and a ban on future 
employment.  In specific cases the matter should be reported to the Police for criminal 
prosecution. 
 
4. 
Generally, candidates for recruitment made by selection are required to send 
passport size copies of their photographs with their applications.  But this is not compulsory. 
It is considered desirable to ask all candidates to submit such photographs with their 
applications. 
 
[Authority:– Estt. Div.’s Letter No. F.40/650-S.E.I. dated 21-6-1950 to all Provincial Governments]. 
Endorsement:- 
 
Copy to all Ministries/Divisions with the request that the genuineness of 
educational certificates produced by persons in the ministerial service of the Federal 
Secretariat and its Attached Departments, who have been declared fit for retention 
in government service in pursuance of the instructions contained in the 
Establishment Division O.M. No. 33/l/48-Ests. (ME), dated the 15th March, 1948 
should also be checked and, in case of doubt, verified in accordance with the 
procedure laid down above. 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -109 
 
 
 
1.5 
Selection Procedure of Chief Executives 
in Key Public Sector Enterprises 
 
Refer to the subject cited above and to state that the selection process of Chief 
Executives/Administrative Heads of Statutory Bodies, Autonomous/Semi-Autonomous 
Bodies, Corporations, Public Sector Companies and Banks governed by Banking 
Nationalization Act shall be processed in accordance with the following guidelines, 
approved by the Federal Government. These guidelines shall apply on the entities listed 
at Annex in the first phase.  
(i) 
There shall be a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose of 
selecting Chief Executives/Administrative Heads of the entities 
mentioned supra. The Selection Committee shall be a recommending 
body for proposing a short list of suitable candidates. The composition of 
the Committee would vary with the nature of the organization and the 
job. The selection committee shall consist of: 
(a) 
Minister Incharge of the Administrative Division under which the 
institution falls as per Rules of Business, 1973 as Chairman. 
(Where the charge of a Ministry/Division is held by Prime 
Minister, the selection committee shall be headed by a Minister 
incharge/Minister of Sate/Adviser/Special Assistant to the Prime 
Minister, as nominated by the Prime Minister). 
(b) 
Secretary of the Administrative Division under which the 
institution falls as per Rules of Business,1973 as member.  
(c) 
One to three experts having domain knowledge to be nominated as 
Member by the concerned Minister Incharge.  
(d) 
The non-executive Chairman of the Board of Directors or a senior 
member of the Board of Directors of the institution in cases where 
such Board exists; and where such Board does not exist, a person 
to be nominated by the Minister Incharge as member. 
(ii) 
The concerned Ministry/Division will carry out the Secretariat functions 
including preparation of the record of all the candidates eligible for 
interview, recording and circulating the minutes of the Committee 
meeting and preparing the short list approved by the Committee.  
(iii) 
Each requisitioning Ministry/Division shall furnish job description, 
eligibility criteria and skills required for the job. The Selection 
Committee will decide the evaluation parameters for the job. The 
concerned Division will place a public advertisement in the leading 
newspapers and post advertisement on the relevant websites of the 
Government.  
(iv) 
The concerned Division will submit the list of eligible candidates to the 
Selection Committee for initial review. After this initial review, the 
concerned Division will arrange interviews for the shortlisted candidates. 
The Chairman of the selection committee will forward a list of 3 to 5 
candidates to the appointing authority.  

Page -110                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
(v) 
The appointing authority can select any one of the candidates 
recommended by the Selection Committee. The appointing authority, if 
not satisfied with the recommended candidates, shall ask for a fresh 
panel. The Chief Executive thus selected will be appointed on contract for 
a fixed tenure as prescribed in the relevant law or as advertised.  
(vi) 
In case an officer working in the Government or Armed Forces is selected 
for the job of Chief Executive and he/she decides to opt for the associated 
compensation package he/she would have to seek premature retirement or 
resign from the Government.  
 
2. 
The appointments in the Public Sector Companies (PSCs), which have 
been identified for transfer to Sarmya-e-Pakistan Ltd (SPL) shall be made by the SPL 
Board. However, until such time these PSCs are transferred to SPL, the procedure 
mentioned above may be followed.  
 
3. 
Amendment in Rule 5(2) of the Public Sector Companies (Corporate 
Governance) Rules,2013 and other consequential/ancillary amendments will be made by 
the Securities & Exchange Commission of Pakistan and until amendment in Rule 5(2) is 
notified the existing provisions of rules 5(2) shall prevail.  
 
4. 
While applying the above guidelines for appointment of Chief Executive 
Officers of banks and development financial institutions, the Fit and Proper Test Criteria 
(FPTC) and the relevant provisions of Banks Nationalization Act 1974 shall also be 
followed by the Committee. 
 
5. 
Appointments in Statutory/Regulatory Bodies shall continue to be 
governed under the rules, if framed, made under the relevant statutes and if there are no 
rules and until such rules are framed, the appointments shall be regulated as provided in 
these guidelines.  
  [Authority:- Establishment Division‘s O.M. No.F.1/29/2018-E-6 dated 28-03-2019]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -111 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
Aviation Division 
1. 
Pakistan International Airlines (PIA) 
2. 
Civil Aviation Authority (Regulatory part only) 
Cabinet Division 
3. 
National College of Arts (NCA) 
4. 
Oil and Gas Regulatory Authority (OGRA) 
Commerce Division 
5. 
National Tariff Commission (NTC) 
6. 
Trading Corporation of Pakistan (TCP) 
7. 
Trade Development Authority of Pakistan (TDAP) 
8. 
National Insurance Company Ltd. (NICL) 
9. 
Pakistan Reinsurance Company Ltd. (PRCL) 
Climate Change Division 
10. 
Pakistan Environmental Protection Agency (PEPA) 
Federal Education and Professional Training Division 
11. 
Higher Education Commission (HEC) 
12. 
National Vocational and Technical Education Commission (NAVTEC) 
Finance Division 
13. 
Competition Commission  
14. 
Securities Exchange Commission of Pakistan (SECP) 
15. 
Central Directorate of National Saving (CDNS) 
16. 
House Building Finance Corporation (HBFC) 
17. 
Pakistan Brunei Investment 
18. 
Kushali Bank of Pakistan (KPB) 
19. 
Pakistan Kuwait Investment Company (PKIC) 
20. 
Pakistan Libyan Holding Company (PLHC) 
21. 
Pakistan Oman Investment Company Ltd. (POIC) 
22. 
Saudi Pak. Agriculture and Industries Company (SAPAIC) 
23. 
Zari Taraqiati Bank Limited (ZTBL) 
24. 
First Women Bank Limited (FWBL). 
25. 
National Bank of Pakistan (NBP) 
26. 
Pak-Iran Joint Investment Company Ltd. 
27. 
Public Procurement Regulatory Authority (PPRA) 
Food Security & Research Division 
28. 
Pakistan Agriculture Research Council (PARC) 
National Health Services, Regulation & Coordination Division 
29. 
National Institute of Health (NIH), Islamabad 
30. 
Pakistan Institute of Medical Science (PIMS), Islamabad 
31. 
Drug Regulatory Authority of Pakistan (DRAP) 
Industries and Production Division 
32. 
Export Processing Zone Authority (EPZA) 
Information and Broadcasting Division 
33. 
Pakistan Television Corporation (PTV) 
34. 
Pakistan Electronic Media Regulatory Authority (PEMRA) 
Inter-Provincial Coordination Division  
35. 
Pakistan Sports Board (PSB) 
Information Technology and Telecommunication Division  
36. 
Universal Service Fund (USF) 
37. 
Pakistan Telecommunication Authority (PTA) 

Page -112                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
Interior Division 
38. 
National Data Registration Authority (NADRA) 
Maritime Affairs Division 
39. 
Pakistan National Shipping Corporation (PNSC), Karachi 
40. 
Karachi Ports Trust (KPT), Karachi 
41. 
Ports Qasim Authority (PQA), Karachi 
42. 
Gwadar Ports Authority (GPA), Karachi 
Petroleum Division 
43. 
Pakistan State Oil (PSO) 
44. 
Sui Southern Gas Co. 
45. 
Sui Northern Gas Co. 
46 
Pakistan Petroleum Ltd. 
47. 
Oil and Gas Development Corporation  
Prime Minister‘s Office 
48. 
Board of Investment (BOI) 
Privatization Division 
49. 
Privatization Commission 
Power Division 
50. 
Jamshoro Power Generation Co. 
51. 
Central Power Generation Co. 
52. 
Northern Power Generation Co. 
53. 
Lakhra Power Generation Co. 
54. 
IESCO, Islamabad 
55. 
LESCO, Lahore 
56. 
GEPCO, Gujranwala 
57. 
MEPCO, Multan 
58. 
FESCO, Faisalabad 
59. 
HESCO, Hyderabad 
60. 
QESCO, Quetta 
61. 
PESCO, Peshawar 
62. 
TESCO, Tribal Areas 
Science & Technology Division 
63. 
Pakistan Standard Quality Control Authority (PSQCA) 
Statistics Division 
64. 
Pakistan Bureau of Statistics (PBS) 
Water Resources Division 
65. 
Water and Power Development Authority (WAPDA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -113 
 
 
1.6 
Procedure for Making Recruitment  
from Abroad 
 
The question of the procedure which should be adopted when it becomes 
necessary to resort to recruitment from abroad to civil posts under the Central 
Government has been engaging the attention of the Establishment Division for some 
time. It has now been decided by the Government of Pakistan that recruitment from 
abroad should be made in the manner indicated in the following paragraphs. 
 
2. 
If a Ministry considers that it is necessary to make recruitment to civil 
posts from abroad, it should make a reference to the Federal Public Service Commission, 
asking them to agree to such recruitment and if they agree, to proceed without delay to 
take all the steps necessary to make such recruitment. The Federal Public Service 
Commission will themselves advertise the post or posts abroad and make necessary 
arrangements for the candidates to be interviewed by Special Selection Committee. 
Thereafter, the Federal Public Service Commission will make recommendations for the 
filling of the post or posts in question.  In no case should the Ministry itself take steps to 
advertise the post. 
 
3. 
There may, however, be exceptional cases in which the Ministries 
concerned are of the view that recruitment from abroad through the Federal Public 
Service Commission will prove infructuous, e.g., in the case of appointments to highly 
technical posts or other posts of considerable importance in connection with which 
persons of high standing abroad are not likely to respond to advertisements and appear 
for interviews.  In such cases, which should be very rare, the prior approval of the Prime 
Minister will be necessary for recruitment to be made by the Ministry concerned without 
the assistance of the Federal Public Service Commission.  The procedure to be adopted in 
such cases will be that the matter should be referred to the Establishment Division so that 
the orders of the Prime Minister can be obtained. Such reference to the Establishment 
Division should be made only after the Federal Public Service Commission have first 
agreed to recruitment to the post in question being made from abroad, and it should be 
accompanied by a Summary for the Prime Minister, explaining why it is necessary for 
recruitment to be made otherwise than through the Federal Public Service Commission 
and showing what steps the Ministry have in mind for filling the post or posts in question. 
 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.11/18/49-SE-II, dated 17-1-1951]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
 ‗Federal‘. 

Page -114                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
II. FRAMING OF RECRUITMENT RULES 
 
2.1 
Framing of Recruitment Rules 
 
The methods of appointment of Federal civil posts are regulated under the 
provisions of the Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973 framed 
under Section 25 of the Civil Servants Act, 1973. As these rules provide the basic framework 
for appointment to Federal civil posts, instructions were issued vide Establishment Division 
O.M.No. 9/1/73-D.V., dated 29.11.73 laying down a simplified format for notifying 
recruitment rules since the earlier pattern of detailed recruitment rules for various 
posts/cadres was no longer considered necessary. The system has its advantages but over the 
years, the framing of recruitment rules has become an increasingly mechanical exercise and 
is now reduced to simply inserting uniform standards (of educational requirements, 
experience, age limits, etc) for equivalent posts in various departments. As a result, the 
recruitment rules are no more viewed as important and essential instruments of career 
planning nor do they properly reflect the job requirements particularly in technical 
posts/cadres. This trend should be reversed and recruitment rules for various posts/cadres 
should be framed with greater care to serve, on the one hand, as instruments of career 
planning for the officials concerned and on the other, be tailored around the job requirements 
particularly in technical cadres. 
 
2. 
It is, therefore, requested that, while framing recruitment rules, due 
consideration should be given to job descriptions for laying down the qualifications/ 
experience for posts and the composition of cadre for prescribing percentage, for direct 
recruitment and promotions. Efforts should be made to safeguard both the department's 
interest in raising a fully-qualified and experienced cadre and the career interests of its 
members whose promotions are governed under the provisions of recruitment rules. 
 
3. 
Establishment Division has also noticed that some Divisions/ Departments 
have framed recruitment rules for isolated posts or very small cadres (comprising 3-4 posts) 
like telephone operators, lady health visitors, teachers of departmental schools, etc. This is 
not a satisfactory arrangement because such isolated posts or tiny cadres do not offer 
adequate prospects of promotion to the incumbents. In such cases, it would be advisable to 
fill the posts by having officials on deputation from departments which have large cadres 
operating in the relevant field, such as T&T Department*  in the case of telephone operators, 
Federal/ Provincial Health/Education Departments in the case of lady health visitors and 
teachers, etc. The Divisions/Departments are, therefore, advised not to frame separate 
recruitment rules for their isolated posts or very small cadres where officials with requisite 
skills are available in other federal/provincial departments. The posts of the type under 
reference may be filled by deputation on tenure basis. 
 
4.  
As a matter of general policy, a person below the age of 18 years cannot be 
employed as a government servant. Other than this limitation, prescribing minimum age 
limits for each post is not only unnecessary but leaves the possibility of denying opportunity 
                                                          
* T&T Department **was converted into Pakistan Telecommunication Corporation Ltd. (PTCL) which has been 
privatized as Pakistan Telecommunication Company Ltd. (PTCL) by the Government of Pakistan. However, 
there is now National Telecommunication Corporation (NTC) for the telecommunication needs of 
government.** [Erstwhile] Telephone and Telegraph Department. 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -115 
 
 
to some otherwise qualified and capable candidates on a mere technicality. It has, therefore, 
been decided that, while framing recruitment rules, no conditions regarding minimum age be 
mentioned. In the existing cases, Ministries/Divisions may consider the matter and take steps 
to amend the rules, wherever necessary. 
[Authority:– Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No. 9/1/73-R.5, dated 22-8-1984]. 
 
2.2 
Provisions of Supporting Information/Documents  
with Draft Recruitment Rules for Obtaining 
Concurrence of Establishment Division or Framing/ 
Amendment of Recruitment Rules and Upgradation/ 
Re-designation of Posts 
It has been observed that most of the Ministries/Divisions/Departments do not 
append supporting documents at the time of submission of cases for framing/amendment 
of Recruitment Rules and the proposal regarding up-gradation/ re-designation of posts. 
This results in delay in the process of analysis of the case as well as approval. Therefore, 
all Ministries/Divisions/Departments are requested to ensure enclosure of following 
information/documents while forwarding of proposals regarding: 
a. 
Framing or Amendment of Recruitment Rules 
(i) 
Sanction to the creation/continuation/up-gradation of posts duly 
endorsed by Finance Division. 
(ii) 
A statement showing total number of post(s) with designation, BPS and 
the total number of their feeding posts.  
(iii) Whether post(s) is/are filled-up what method was adopted 
and full particulars of the incumbents. 
(iv) Job description of the concerned post(s). 
(v) 
Comparative statement showing job description of promotional 
posts and feeding posts. 
(vi) Full 
justifications 
in 
case 
of 
revision 
of 
Recruitment 
Rules/Amendment thereto. 
(vii) Comparative Statement showing the provisions of Recruitment 
Rules corresponding provisions of draft Recruitment Rules, in case 
Recruitment Rules of posts already exists. 
(viii) Organizational chart showing the concerned posts.  
(ix) A certificate that subject matter is not pending in any court 
of law.  
(x) 
Draft Recruitment Rules on the prescribed format (printed in 
Estacode and available on official website of Establishment 
Division). 

Page -116                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
(xi) Clear status of the Department/Organization and its employees. 
(xii) Soft copy of draft Recruitment Rules or amendment.  
(xiii) Clarify whether qualification of posts in BPS-16 and above 
are proposed in draft Rules is in line with this Division‘s 
O.M No. of even number, dated 02-05-2019 or otherwise.   
b. 
Up-gradation of posts 
(i) 
The 
rationale 
for 
up-gradation 
after 
analyzing/examining 
the case on the basis of provision contained in the policy of 
up-gradation/re-designation 
of 
posts 
issued 
by 
Establish- 
ment Division. 
(ii) 
Justifications 
for 
up-gradation/re-designation 
of 
posts, 
as 
the case may be, indicating specific point of policy under 
which proposals is found covered. 
(iii) Re-structuring 
study 
conducted 
by 
Management 
Services 
Wing of Establishment Division. 
(iv) Recruitment Rules of the subject posts.  
(v) 
Job description of the post.  
(vi) Comparative 
statement 
showing 
the 
qualification, 
experience, age limit of post which is proposed to be up- 
graded corresponding qualification, experience, age limit of 
identical/same post available in higher pay scale in other 
Ministry/Division.  
(vii) Certificate 
that 
structure 
of 
the 
Department 
have 
been 
examined strictly in line with policy for up-gradation/re- 
designation of  posts 
issued 
by 
Establishment 
and 
no 
other reference for up-gradation/re-designation of posts will 
be made to Establishment Division till 05 years.  
(viii) A certificate that subject matter is not pending in any court 
of law.        
  
c. 
Re-Designation of Posts 
(i)  
In case designation already exists, Recruitment Rules of  
existing 
and 
proposed 
post 
for 
re-designation 
which 
is 
available.  
(ii) 
Job description of the both posts.  
(iii) Comparative 
statement 
showing 
qualification, 
experience 
and age limit of both posts.  
(iv) A certificate that upon re-designation there will be no seniority or 
other administrative conflict/anomaly and in case of any 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -117 
 
 
administrative/seniority 
anomaly/conflict 
or 
court 
case, 
administrative 
Ministry/Division 
will 
defend 
the 
same 
independently at every forum.    
(v) 
A certificate that subject matter is not pending in any court of law. 
(vi) Full justifications for re-designation of posts by referring the same 
designation in hierarchy of Federal Government. 
 
d. 
Autonomous, Semi-Autonomous Organizations/Corporations etc. 
(i)  
Copy of Act of Parliament/Ordinance containing the enabling 
provisions regarding framing of Service Rules/ Service Regulations/ 
By Laws etc.  
(ii) 
Approval of Board of Governor/Board of Directors/ Governing body 
etc who is empowered to frame the service rules/regulations. 
(iii) Clear status of the organizations and its employees.  
(iv) Duly signed and stamped Draft Service Rules/Regulations. 
(v) 
Soft copy should be in the following pattern: 
 
Draft Service Rules 
Views/Comments of 
Establishment Division 
1…………… 
 
2…………… 
 
        
 
(vi) Schedules of Recruitment Rules should be on the prescribed format 
given in the ESTACODE. 
(vii) For amendment in existing Rules/Regulations, information may be 
furnished in the following pattern:— 
 
      
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Existing 
provisions 
Proposed 
provisions  
Justification 
Views/comments of 
Establishment Division  
 
 
 
 

Page -118                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
 
2. 
Ministries/Divisions are also advised to ensure framing of only two sets 
of Recruitment Rules one for posts in BPS-15 and below and other for posts in BPS-16 
and above. Therefore, hereafter, the cases of Recruitment Rules in piece meal form will 
not be entertained in the Establishment Division. 
 
3. 
It is also observed that Ministries/Divisions/Departments use to forward 
their proposal pertaining to those cases which are sub-judice in a court of law without 
intimating the fact to this Division. Resultantly, this division unnecessarily becomes a 
party in that case. It is, therefore, decided that in future such cases will not be entertained 
by the Establishment Division before final outcome of the case from court of law.  
 
4. 
In view of above, all Ministries/Divisions/Departments are requested to 
comply with the instructions narrated above for timely disposal of the case by the 
Establishment Division. All previous instructions issued by this division on the subject 
matter stand modified.  
[Authority:— Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 1/4/201-R-5 dated 08-06-2020]. 
 
2.3 
Detailed Recruitment Rules Not Necessary:  
only Method of Appointment, Qualifications,  
Experience etc. to be Notified 
 
 Reference Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973. It is 
stated that in view of these rules, it is no longer necessary to frame detailed recruitment rules 
on the pattern of model recruitment rules.  It would suffice if only matters specified in sub-
rule (2) of rule 3 of the Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973 
i.e. method of appointment, qualifications/ experience etc., are laid down in a notification 
(specimen at Annex). 
 
2. 
The Ministries/Divisions are therefore advised to take action accordingly in 
respect of the posts under them for which recruitment rules have not been framed so far and 
inform all concerned under them. 
[Authority.– Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.9/1/73-DV., dated 29-11-1973]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -119 
 
 
ANNEX 
(See para 1, 2.4) 
GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN _______ 
MINISTRY OF _________ 
_________________(DIVISION) 
NOTIFICATION 
 
In pursuance of sub-rule (2) of rule 3 of the Civil Servants (Appointment, 
Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973, the following method, qualifications and other 
conditions are laid down for appointment to the posts of _______ (Designation and Basic 
Pay Scale of the posts under the Ministry/Division_____________). 
METHOD OF APPOINTMENT 
 
2.  
Specify method of appointment to the posts i.e. whether by promotion or 
direct recruitment. Where posts are required to be filled partly by promotion and partly by 
direct recruitment, the percentage for promotion/direct recruitment may also be mentioned. 
    
For example: 
 
 
S. 
No. 
Designation and BPS of the Post 
By Promotion 
By Initial 
Appointment 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
1. 
Name of Post 
% 
% 
 
 
[Provided that if no suitable person is available for promotion, the post or posts 
reserved for promotion shall be filled by initial appointment and failing that by transfer. 
 
Provided further that if no suitable person is available for promotion to a post, it 
may be filled, in the public interest, by temporary transfer/ posting of a civil servant, or by 
deputation of an employee of a public sector corporation in consultation with his appointing 
authority.] 
CONDITIONS FOR PROMOTION 
 
3.  
Promotion to posts in column 1 below shall be made by selection from 
amongst the persons who hold the posts specified in column 2 on a regular basis and possess 
the qualifications and experience prescribed in column 3. 
 
Name of the post 
Persons eligible 
Condition of eligibility 
1 
2 
3 
 
 
 
QUALIFICATIONS/CONDITIONS FOR TRANSFER 
 
4. 
Appointments by transfer shall be made from amongst the persons holding 
appointment on a regular basis in the same grade in which the post to be filled exists, 
provided the person concerned possesses the qualifications/experience prescribed for direct 
recruitment or promotion to the post concerned. 
                                                          
Added in pursuance of Estt. Div.‘s OM No. 9/2/2002-R.5, dated 28-10-2002.  
 BPS. 

Page -120                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
QUALIFICATIONS, EXPERIENCE AND AGE LIMITS 
FOR DIRECT RECRUITMENT 
 
5.  
A candidate must possess the educational qualifications and experience and 
must be within the age limits as mentioned against the post concerned in the schedule to this 
notification. *[Unless otherwise provided, the experience prescribed for initial appointment 
will be the post qualification]: 
 
Provided that the maximum age limits will be relaxed by 3 years in the case of 
candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes, Budhist Community, recognized tribes of the 
Tribal Areas, Azad Kashmir and Gilgit-Baltistan (Districts of Gilgit, Skardu and Diamir), in 
accordance with the instructions issued by the Establishment Division: 
 
Provided further that for government servants who have completed at least 2 years 
service, maximum age limit may be relaxed by not more than 10 years upto the age of 55 
years. 
PROBATION 
 
 **[6.(1) Persons appointed by initial appointment, promotion or transfer shall be on 
probation for a period of one year. 
 
(2)  The period of probation may be curtailed for good and sufficient reasons, to 
be recorded, or, if considered necessary, it may be extended for a period not exceeding one 
year, as may be specified at the time of appointment.                                                                                
 
(3) 
On the successful completion of probation period, the appointing authority 
shall, by specific order, terminate the probation. 
 
(4) 
If no order is issued under sub-rule (3), on the expiry of the first year of 
probation period, the period of probation shall be deemed to have been extended under sub-
rule (2): 
 
Provided that, subject to the provisions of proviso to sub-section(2) of section 6 of 
the Civil Servants Act, 1973  in the absence of an order under sub-rule (3), the period of 
probation shall, on the expiry of the extended period under sub-rule (2), be deemed to have 
successfully been completed]. 
 
 
7. 
This notification issues with the concurrence of the Establishment Division. 
 
SCHEDULE 
(See para 5) 
 
S. 
No. 
Designation and 
grade of the post 
Qualifications and 
experience 
Age Limit 
Maximum           Minimum 
 
 
 
 
 
Deputy Secretary 
                                                          
* Added vide Estt. Div.‘s Notification No. F.9/3/92-R.5, dated 31-10-1992. 
** Subs, vide Estt. Division‘s Notification No. S.R.O. 968(1)/82, dated 21-9-1982. 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -121 
 
 
 
2.4 
Consultation with F.P.S.C. in  
Respect of Recruitment Rules 
 
F.P.S.C. not to be consulted in respect of posts in BPS 15 and below.– It has been 
brought to the notice of this Division by the FPSC that the Commission are receiving 
references in respect of recruitment rules for posts in BPS 15 and below from various 
Ministries/Divisions. 
 
2.  
In this connection attention is invited to para-3 of this Division O.M. of even 
No. dated 27th August, 1978 wherein it has been mentioned that the Commission will advise 
the President on matters relating to qualifications for and methods of appointment to, the 
services and posts recruitment to which is required to be made through the Commission. 
 
3. 
The Ministries/Divisions are, therefore, advised that the recruitment rules for 
posts in BPS 15 and below (which do not fall within the purview of the FPSC) may not be 
referred to the Commission. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.11/2/78-DV., dated 19-2-1979]. 
 
2.5 
Framing of Recruitment Rules:  
 
 
Consultation With FPSC 
 
Recruitment rules for various posts are required to be framed by the 
Ministries/Divisions concerned in consultation with the Establishment Division in pursuance 
of rule 3(2) of Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973. 
Concurrence of the Federal Public Service Commission is also required with regard to 
qualifications for, and methods of recruitment to posts in BPS 16 and above, in the light of 
Section 7(b) Federal Public Service Commission Ordinance, 1977 read with FPSC 
(Functions) Rules, 1978. 
 
2. 
The question of finding ways to cut down the inordinate delay often involved 
in the finalization of the recruitment rules due to protracted correspondence between the 
Ministry/Division concerned, the Federal Public Service Commission and the Establishment 
Division has been receiving the attention of the Establishment Division for some time past. It 
has now been decided on the recommendation of the Committee for Decentralization of 
Powers recently appointed by the President to appoint a standing committee comprising one 
representative of the Ministry/Division concerned and one representative of the 
Establishment Division to finalize the recruitment rules by discussion whenever their 
finalization is delayed due to difference of opinion between the Ministry or Division 
concerned and the Establishment Division or between any of the above two and the Federal 
Public Service Commission will also be invited to the meeting of the Committee where there 
is a difference of opinion with F.P.S.C. 
[Authority. Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.7/6/87-R.5, dated 10-7-1988]. 
 
2.6 
Recruitment Rules for the Posts of Private Secretary (BPS 17) to the 
Secretaries/ Additional Secretaries and Other Officers in BPS 21/22 
Provided with the Services of P.S in the Federal Government 
 
It may be noted that only those officers in BPS 21/22, other than the Federal 
Secretaries/Additional Secretaries, are entitled to a Private Secretary who have either been 

Page -122                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
specifically allowed ex-officio secretariat status or have been allowed, with the approval of 
Establishment and Finance Divisions, to have a Private Secretary (BPS 17) on their personal 
staff. 
 [Authority.– Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No.9/2/74-R.6(Pt.2), dated 21-1-1988]. 
 
2.7 
Recruitment to the Posts of Private Secretaries  
 
 
to the Federal Ministers and Ministers of State 
 
In supersession of the Cabinet Division's O.M.No.112/2/80-Min.I, dated 10th  
November, 1980 and No.112/18/81-Min.I, dated 13th March, 1982, it is stated that the 
Federal Ministers and Ministers of State shall appoint their Private Secretaries from the 
normal source (not from outside), provided it does not involve out of turn/accelerated 
promotion for the Private Secretary, as follows:— 
 
Federal Ministers: 
 
A BPS 16, 17, 18 officer or a Deputy Secretary in his own pay and allowances with 
a special pay. 
 
Ministers of State: 
 
A BPS 16, 17, 18 officer in his own pay and allowances with a special pay or a 
government servant in lower pay scale in his own pay and allowances with a 
special pay.  
 
2. 
Finance Division's O.M. No.F.1(1)-Imp/83, dated the 18th August, 1983 and 
No. F. 26(1)R-1/80(ii), dated 30th June, 1981 and No.F.1(1)-Imp/83-Pt(iii), dated 15th  
September, 1983 are modified to the above extent in respect of rates of special pays 
admissible to the Private Secretaries to the Ministers. 
 
3. 
This issues with the concurrence of Establishment and the Finance Division 
conveyed vide their O.M.No.12/1/88-OMG-I, dated 7th April, 1988, and No.F.2(55)R.3/88-
615, dated 1st August, 1988 respectively. 
 
[Authority:— Cabinet Division O.M.No.112/6/87-Min.I, dated 20-11-1988.] 
 
2.8 
Framing of Recruitment Rules – Making  
Ad-Hoc Appointments  
 
It has been observed that the Ministries/Divisions resort to making ad-hoc 
appointments either in the absence of recruitment rules or during the course of 
finalization of these rules. It has also been observed that the finalization of recruitment 
rules take considerable time and the F.P.S.C. do not entertain requisitions for regular 
appointments or proposals for first extension in ad-hoc appointments unless the rules 
have been notified. This leads to avoidable administrative complications besides causing 
financial hardship to the ad-hoc appointees. Ministries/Divisions are, therefore, advised 
to invariably draft their recruitment rules in the light of model rules already circulated 
and follow up their finalization/notification on top priority basis so that the time-lag is 
reduced to the barest minimum. Wherever necessary, Ministries/ Divisions may hold 
joint meetings with the Establishment Division/FPSC so as to eliminate delay in the 
finalization of the recruitment rules. 
[Authority.– Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.2/7/85-CP.5 dated 10-6-1987]. 
 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -123 
 
 
III.  FRAMING OF RECRUITMENT RULES OF PROJECT POSTS 
 
3.1 
Waiver of Framing of Recruitment Rules 
  
for Project Posts in Ministries/Divisions  
 
Refer to the subject cited above and to state that on the recommendations of a 
committee on Salary Package for Development Projects headed by the Secretary, Planning & 
Development Division, the following decisions have been taken with the approval of the 
Prime Minister, for timely appointment of project staff and implementation of development 
projects:— 
(i) 
Where posts with the similar designation/BPS already exist in a 
Ministry/Division/Attached 
Department/Subordinate 
Office, 
the 
qualifications, experience and age limits as laid down for civil posts may 
be followed by Ministry/Division/Attached Department/ Sub-ordinate 
Office concerned for contract appointment to project posts.  
(ii) 
In 
other 
cases, 
the 
Ministries/Divisions/Attached 
Departments/ 
Subordinate 
Office 
should 
preferably 
incorporate 
the 
required 
qualifications and experience on an objective basis in the project PC-I 
document and where such stipulation has not been made in the PC-I 
document, the qualification, experience and age limits shall be laid down 
by the Ministry/Division concerned.  
(iii) 
The project posts shall be advertised and selection shall be made on the 
recommendations of the appropriate Departmental Selection Committee 
except where a Selection Committee has been separately constituted by 
the Planning and Development Division. 
(iv) 
Appointment to project posts sanctioned in basic pay scales shall be made 
with the approval of appointing authorities as prescribed for civil posts in 
Rule-6 of the Civil Servant (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) 
Rules, 1973. 
(v) 
The Secretary of the Division concerned may approve the appointment of 
Project Director whose salary package is equivalent or upto maximum of 
MP-III. 
(vi) 
The cases of appointment to project posts carrying emoluments beyond 
MP-III shall be submitted for approval of the Prime Minster. 
(vii)  Initially, contract appointment to project posts shall be made for two 
years and extension of contract appointment to posts carrying 
emoluments equivalent to MP-III and above shall be made, on year to 
year basis, on the recommendations of the Evaluation Committee, 
constituted under Finance Division O.M No. F.3(7)/R.4/98-Vol.II/2007 
(B) dated 11th April,2007. 
 
2. 
Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 7/8/2000.R-6 dated 27th July, 2002 
may be treated as withdrawn.  
[Authority:— Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 9/4/91.R-5 dated 28-01-2008.] 

Page -124                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
 
3.2 
Bar Against Revising Qualifications  
Prescribed for the Posts in the  
Recruitment Rules 
 
The Federal Public Service Commission have brought to notice that the 
Ministries/Divisions, while placing requisitions for recruitment to posts under them, 
deviate from the qualifications and other conditions prescribed for the posts in the 
recruitment rules.  In some cases, requests were received by the Commission for 
modification of the qualifications after the posts had been advertised. 
 
2. 
Ministries/Divisions are requested to ensure that qualifications and other 
conditions prescribed for various posts in the recruitment rules are strictly adhered to.  If 
for any reasons these qualifications and conditions are required to be modified, the 
revised qualifications should be settled in consultation with the Establishment Division 
before requisitions are placed with the Commission.  Once a requisition has been placed 
for recruitment and the post has been advertised by the Commission, the qualifications etc., 
should not be revised. 
 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.9/3/73-D.V., dated 26-11-1973]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -125 
 
 
IV. PROVINCIAL / REGIONAL QUOTAS FOR RECRUITMENT 
 
4.1 
Provincial/Regional Quotas for Recruitment to 
 
 
the Civil Posts under the Federal Government 
 
 
Provincial and Regional quotas prescribed in 2007 for direct recruitment to civil 
posts under the Federal Government vide Establishment Division‘s OM No. 4/10/2006-R-II, 
dated 12.02.2007 have been reviewed and it has been decided by the Federal Government 
that with immediate effect, the following merit and provincial/regional quotas shall be 
observed in filling vacancies reserved for direct recruitment to posts under the Federal 
Government which are filled on All-Pakistan basis:— 
 
Merit  
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.5% 
 
Punjab (including Federal Area of Islamabad) 
  
50% 
 
Sindh 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19% 
 
 
The share of Sindh will be further  
 
 
Sub-allocated in the following ratio: 
 
 
Urban areas namely Karachi, Hyderabad 
 
40% of 19% 
 
 
and Sukkar  
 
 
 
 
or 7.6% 
 
 
Rural areas i.e. rest of Sindh excluding Karachi  
60% of 19% 
 
 
Hyderabad and Sukkar. 
 
 
 
or 11.4% 
 
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa 
 
 
 
 
11.5% 
 
Balochistan 
 
 
 
 
 
6% 
 
 
Newly merged Districts of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (Ex-FATA) 
    3% 
(This share shall not be merged into Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and be observed 
independently for next 10 years in conjunction with the ten-year Development 
Plan devised to bring the Ex-FATA at par with the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa 
socially and economically). 
Gilgit-Baltistan  
 
 
 
 
 1% 
 
Azad Kashmir                                                                               2% 
 
[Authority:– Estt. Div.‘s OM No. 4/10/2006-R-2, dated 14th February, 2020] 
 
 
4.2 
Clarification Regarding Provincial/Regional  
Quotas for Recruitment to the Civil Posts under  
the Federal Government  
 
Administrative instructions regarding provincial/regional quotas prescribed vide 
O.M  of even number dated 12-02-2007 have been revised in the light of Cabinet Decision 
to the extent of bifurcation of 4% combined quota of Gilgit-Baltistan/ FATA vide O.M of 
even number dated 14-02-2020. 
 
2. 
It is to clarify that the bifurcated provincial/regional quota shall be 
applicable prospectively and shall be effective from the date of its issue. The said O.M shall 
have no effect on recruitment process which has been initiated prior to 14-02-2020. 
 
[Authority:— Establishment Division‘s O.M No.4/10/2006-R-2 dated 18-03-2020]. 

Page -126                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
4.3 
Provincial Representation in Islamabad  
Capital Territory Administration 
 
In compliance with the judgment of Islamabad High Court, Islamabad in Writ 
Petition No.1648 of 2015 dated 03-09-2015 under which the Secretary Establishment 
Division and Secretary Ministry of Interior have been directed to issue a fresh Office 
Memorandum for allocation quota for residents of Islamabad Capital Territory, and directed 
to state that with the approval of Prime Minister the following regional/provincial allocation 
has been prescribed in filling vacancies reserved for direct recruitment to posts under the 
Federal Government which are filled on All Pakistan basis to the extent of offices of 
Islamabad Capital Territory whose functional jurisdiction is restricted to Islamabad Capital 
Territory:— 
 
Merit  
 
 
 
 
 
 
6% 
 
Punjab  
 
 
 
 
 
40% 
 
Islamabad Capital Territory 
 
 
 
20% 
 
Sindh: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15% 
 
The share of Sindh will be further sub-allocated in  
 
the following ratio:— 
Urban Areas namely Karachi, Hyderabad 
 
 
6% 
& Sukkar 
Rural Areas i.e. rest of Sindh excluding Karachi. 
 
9% 
Hyderabad & Sukkar 
 
 
 
 
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa 
 
 
 
 
9% 
Balochistan 
 
 
 
 
 
5% 
Gilgit-Baltistan/FATA 
 
 
 
 
3% 
AJ&K  
 
 
 
 
 
2% 
 
[Authority:— Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 4/3/93-R-II dated 26-01-2016]. 
4.4 
Observance of Provincial/Regional Quota  
While Making Contract Appointments 
 
It is clarified that as the contract appointments are initial appointments within the 
meaning of Section 2(1) (c) of the Civil Servants Act, 1973, the instructions relating to 
Provincial Regional Quota are applicable to such appointments  
 
[Authority:- Establishment Division‘s O.M. No.2/38/2002-CP-I dated 15-08-2002]. 
4.5 
Reservation of 10% Quota for Employment  
of Women Across-the-Board in Federal  
Government Services 
 
It has been decided by the Federal Government to reserve with immediate effect, 
10% quota for employment of women to all posts across-the-board in Federal Government 
Services including CSS to be filled by direct recruitment, in addition to their participation in 
the open merit. 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -127 
 
 
 
2. 
This reservation will count as part of overall provincial allocation as 
contained in the Establishment Division‘s OM No. 4/10/2006-R-2, dated 12-2-2007 and will 
be calculated against the quota of the province of origin of women candidates concerned. 
 
3. 
The above reservation will not apply to:- 
(i) 
the percentage of vacancies reserved for recruitment on the basis of merit; 
(ii) 
recruitment made by promotion or transfer in accordance with the relevant 
rules; 
(iii) short term vacancies likely to last for less than six months; and 
(iv) isolated posts in which vacancies occur only occasionally. 
 
4. 
The vacancies reserved for women for which qualified women candidates are 
not available shall be carried forward and filled by women. 
 
5. 
These orders shall also apply to initial appointments in all autonomous/semi-
autonomous bodies/corporations etc. which are administratively controlled by the Federal 
Government. 
 
6. 
Ministries/Divisions are requested to kindly bring the above instructions to 
the notice of all concerned for information and compliance while making future recruitment. 
 
7. 
The instructions contained in Establishment Division‘s OM No. 4/2/89-R-2, 
dated 26.9.1989 and 3/17/2005-R-2, dated 26.9.2006 stand modified to the above extent. 
[Authority:– Establishment Division‘s OM No. 4/15/2006-R-2, dated 22nd May, 2007]. 
4.6 
Reservation of 05% Quota for Employment  
of Minorities (Non-Muslims) Across-the-Board 
in Federal Government Services/Jobs 
 
It has been decided by the Federal Government to reserve, with immediate 
effect, 05% quota for employment of Minorities (Non-Muslims), as defined in Article 
260(3)(b) of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan 1973, to all posts across 
the board in the Federal Government Services/jobs to be filled by direct  recruitment 
including CSS, in addition to their participation in the open merit. 
 
2. 
This reservation will have the same parameters as were prescribed for 
reservation of quota for women vide Establishment Division‘s O.M.No.4/15/2006-R.2 
dated 22-05-2007 and will count as part of overall provincial allocation as contained in 
the Establishment Division‘s O.M. No.4/10/2006 R-2, dated 12-02-2007 (as reviewed 
vide O.M No. 4/10/2006-R-2 dated 14-02-2020) and will be calculated against the quota 
of the province of origin of the Minority (Non-Muslim) candidate concerned.  
 
3. 
The above reservation will not apply to:- 
i) 
the percentage of vacancies reserved for recruitment on the basis of merit; 
ii) 
Recruitment made by promotion or transfer in accordance with the 
relevant rules.  

Page -128                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
iii) 
Short terms vacancies likely to last for less than six months; and  
iv) 
Isolated posts in which vacancies occur only occasionally; 
 
4. 
The vacancies reserved for Minorities (Non-Muslims) for which qualified 
candidates are not available shall be carried forward and filled by Minority (Non-
Muslim) candidates. 
 
5. 
These orders shall also apply to initial appointments in all attached 
departments / autonomous / semi-autonomous bodies / corporations/Public 
corporations and Companies etc. Administratively controlled by the Federal Government. 
 
6. 
For removal of any difficulty the interpretation of the Establishment 
Division shall be final. 
[Authority:- Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.4/15/94-R-2 dated 26-05-2009] 
 
4.7 
Regulation of Provincial/Regional Quotas 
 
Reference Establishment Division's O.M. No. 8/9/72-TRV, dated August 31, 1973 
provincial/regional quotas in respect of posts filled in a particular year are to be worked out 
to 1000th fraction. A province/region, having larger fraction in accordance with the 
prescribed quotas, is allocated the vacant post for recruitment whereas the province/region 
not allocated the post due to smaller fraction, gets those fractions carried forward and added 
to its share in the subsequent year.  The procedure for calculating and carrying forward the 
share of province/region, is indicated in Annex. 
 
2.  
Ministries/Divisions/Departments etc. are requested to regulate the 
Provincial/Regional allocations in respect of posts in grade-17 and above filled by direct 
recruitment after August 31, 1973.  A copy of the up-dated statement should invariably be 
forwarded alongwith summaries sent to the Establishment Division  for seeking approval of 
the competent authority for initial appointment to posts in grade 17 and above. 
 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M. No.9/7/80-A.III, dated 23-9-1980]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -129 
 
 
ANNEX 
Province/ 
Region 
Quota 
(%) 
No. of 
Vacancies 
Share 
Last 
Year's 
C/F 
Balance 
Total 
Vacancies 
to be 
allotted 
Balance 
to be 
carried 
forward 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
1ST  YEAR: 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Merit 
7.5% 
3 
0.225 
- 
+0.225 
- 
+0.225 
Punjab 
50% 
3 
1.500 
- 
+1.500 
2 
- 0.500 
Sindh 
19% 
3 
0.570 
- 
+0.570 
1 
-0.430 
Sindh (U) 
7.6% of 
19%  
3 
0.228 
- 
+0.228 
- 
+0.228 
Sindh(R) 
11.4%  
of 19% 
3 
0.342 
- 
+0.342 
1 
-0.658 
K.P.K 
11.5% 
3 
0.345 
- 
+0.345 
- 
+ 0.345 
Balochistan 
6% 
3 
0.180 
- 
+0.180 
- 
+0.180 
GB/FATA 
4% 
3 
0.120 
- 
+0.120 
- 
+0.120 
AJ&K 
2% 
3 
0.060 
- 
+0.060 
- 
+0.060 
2ND YEAR: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Merit 
7.5% 
5 
0.375 
0.225 
0.600 
1 
-0.400 
Punjab 
50% 
5 
2.500 
- 0.500 
2.000 
2 
- 
Sindh 
19% 
5 
0.950 
-0.430 
0.520 
1 
-0.480 
Sindh (U) 
7.6% of 
19% 
5 
0.380 
+ 0.228 
0.608 
1 
- 0.392 
Sindh(R) 
11.4% 
of 19% 
5 
0.570 
- 0.658 
-0.088 
- 
- 0.088 
K.P.K 
11.5% 
5 
0.575 
+ 0.345 
+0.920 
1 
-0.080 
Balochistan 
6% 
5 
0.300 
+0.180 
0.480 
- 
+0.480 
*GB/FATA 
4% 
5 
0.200 
+ 0.120 
0.320 
- 
+0.320 
AJ&K 
2% 
5 
0.010 
+ 0.060 
+0.160 
- 
+0.160 
3RD  YEAR: 
Merit 
 
7.5% 
 
2 
 
0.150 
 
- 0.400 
 
-0.250 
 
- 
 
- 0.250 
Punjab 
50% 
2 
1.000 
 
1.000 
1 
- 
Sindh 
19% 
2 
0.380 
-0.480 
-0.100 
- 
-0.100 
Sindh (U) 
7.6% of  
 19% 
2 
0.152 
- 0.392 
- 0.240 
- 
- 0.240 
Sindh(R) 
11.4% 
of 19% 
2 
 
0.228 
-0.088 
 
+0.140 
 
- 
- 
+0.140 
 
K.P.K 
11.5% 
2 
0.230 
-0.080 
+0.150 
- 
+0.150 
Balochistan 
6% 
2 
0.120 
+0.480 
+0.600 
1 
-0.400 
*GB/FATA 
4% 
2 
0.080 
+0.320 
+0.400 
- 
+ 0.400 
AJ&K 
2% 
2 
0.040 
+ 0.160 
+0.200 
- 
+0.200 
 
                                                          
For bifurcation of quota of GB/FATA please see Sl.No.4.1 & 4.2 vide O.M No.4/10/2006-R-2 dated 14-02-
2020 & 18-03-2020.  

Page -130                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
4.8 
Clarifications Regarding Application  
of Revised Provincial/Regional Quotas 
 
Reference.-Establishment Division O.M.No.F. 8/9/72-TRV, dated the 31st  
August, 1973. 
 
2.  
The following clarifications are issued:— 
(1) 
Posts in each grade should be considered separately for purposes of 
allocation of the prescribed merit and provincial/ regional quotas. 
(2) 
The provincial/regional quotas do not apply to posts filled by promotion.  
These are applicable to direct, including lateral entry, appointments. 
(3) 
Vacancies which cannot be filled by candidates belonging to the province 
or region to which the vacancy is allocated should be carried over and 
re-advertised at a later date. 
(4) 
Posts in the Ministry/Division should be allocated separately from posts in 
Attached Departments and Subordinate Offices.  In other words, the 
allocation should be made separately for each department, office or 
institution. 
(5) 
Provincial/regional quotas do not apply to posts filled by transfer of 
government servants to posts in equivalent grades whether on deputation 
or on secondment as in the case of military officers. 
[Authority:– Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No.8/15/73-TRV, dated 28-11-1973]. 
 
 
4.9 
Isolated Posts - Application of  
Provincial/Regional Quotas 
 
Refer to the Establishment Division‘s O.M.No.8/1/77-W.C., dated 18-04-1977 
on the above subject and to say that it is laid down in that office Memorandum that an 
isolated post should be filled on the basis of merit. The matter has been considered again 
and it has been held that observance of merit and provincial quota in filling vacancies on 
all-Pakistan basis is a statutory requirement vide Rule 14 of the Civil Servants 
(Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973. It is not, therefore, permissible to 
fill in an isolated post on merit only. Such a post will also have to be filled in, in 
accordance with the Rule-14 and the instructions explaining the procedure to be adopted 
in allocating vacancies to the merit and provincial quotas vide Establishment Division‘s 
O.M.No.9/7/80-A.III., dated the 23rd September, 1980. 
[Authority:- Establishment Division‘s O.M.No.8/1/77-W.C./R.2 dated 3rd October,1981]. 
 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -131 
 
 
4.10 Recruitment to Civil Posts in the  
Administration of Gilgit Baltistan 
 
Except appointment in grade 17 in Revenue and Police, recruitment to civil 
posts in Gilgit Baltistan shall, in future, be made only from amongst the local population 
of those areas provided they possess the requisite academic qualifications. Persons other 
than the local residents of Gilgit Baltistan shall not be entitled to apply for appointment to 
such posts. 
 
2. 
However, technical posts requiring specialization may be filled, with the 
prior approval of the Establishment Division from amongst non-residents provided that 
local candidates with the requisite technical qualifications are not available. 
 
3. 
The Gilgit Baltistan shall continue to be excluded in respect of the posts in 
these areas from the purview of the provincial/regional quotas fixed by the government. 
The Establishment Division's O.M.No.F. 8/9/72-TRV dated the 31st August, 1973 
whereby Gilgit Baltistan have been allocated quota for recruitment to civil posts under 
the Federal Government, shall apply to All Pakistan posts only. 
 
4.  
This supersedes the Establishment Division's O.M. No. 8/9/72-TRV/ R.II 
dated 25th June, 1978. 
[Authority:– Estt Division‘s O.M.No.4/l/83-R.2, dated 24-7-1983]. 
 
4.11 ICT Rights of Persons with Disability Act, 2020 
Introduction  
 
This Act is to promote, protect and effectively ensure the rights and inclusion of 
persons with disabilities in the communities in line with the Islamic Injunctions and 
provisions of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan to advance efforts for 
recognition of their respect and dignity in the society; 
 
WHEREAS it is expedient to put in place legal and institutional framework to 
protect the rights of persons with disabilities in general and women, children and the 
elderly in particular, as called for by the United Nations Convention on the Rights of 
Persons with Disabilities, as well as other human rights treaties and conventions to which 
Pakistan is a state party; 
 
It is hereby enacted as follows:- 
PART I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. 
Short title, extent and commencement.- (1) This Act may be called the 
ICT Rights of Persons with Disability Act, 2020. 

Page -132                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
(2)  
It shall extend to the whole of the Islamabad Capital Territory  
(ICT). 
(3) 
It shall come into force at once. 
2. 
Definition:- In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject 
or contest,- 
(a) 
―access‖ means meaningful and effective access to various physical and  
intangible means made suitable to fulfill special needs of persons with 
disabilities; 
(b) 
―barriers‖ means physical, social, psychological, communication, 
information, legal or attitudinal hurdles in the way to access to 
infrastructure and services meant for general public; 
(c) 
―Constitution‖ means the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan; 
(d) 
―Council‖ means the Council on Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
constituted under this Act; 
(e) 
―Court‖ means the Council on Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
constituted under this Act; 
(f) 
―Disability‖  means a long term physical or mental condition that limits a 
person‘s movements, senses or activities and shall include physical, 
mental, intellectual and developmental disorders or sensory impairments 
which in interaction with participate fully and effectively in day to day 
performance and interaction with others on an equal basis;  
(g) 
―discrimination on the basis of disability‖  means any distinction, 
exclusion or restriction on the basis of disability which has the purpose or 
effect of impairing or nullifying the recognition, enjoyment or exercise, 
on an equal basis with others, of all human rights and fundamental 
freedoms in the political, economic, social denial of reasonable 
accommodation; 
(h) 
―equality before law‖ includes principles of quality on equitable basis 
that persons with disability shall  have in line with the Constitution and 
international covenants in which Pakistan is a party; 
(i) 
―freedom of movement‖  shall have the same meaning as expressed in 
Article 15 of the Constitution; 
(j) 
―Fund‖ means the fund established under section 28; 
(k) 
―Independent living‖ means environment to live with freedom, self-
control, choice and self-determination in everyday life; 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -133 
 
 
(l) 
―misconduct‖ shall have the same meaning as defined in the 
[Government Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 1973.] 
(m) 
―mobility‖ means the possible independent for persons with disabilities 
with access to quality mobility aids, devices, assistive technologies and 
forms of assistance intermediaries, including by making them available at 
affordable cost; and 
(n) 
―reasonable accommodation‖ means necessary and appropriate 
modification where needed in a particular case, to ensure that the persons 
with disabilities enjoy or exercise on an equal basis with others of all human 
rights and fundamental freedoms at home, workplace and in social life. 
 
PART II 
RIGHTS OF PERSONS WITHDISABLITIES 
3. 
Equality and non-discrimination of persons with disability.- (1) The 
government shall ensure that every person with disability shall have a right to be 
respected for his individual dignity and lead a decent life with equal opportunity to 
participate in educational, social, economic, cultural and all other activities in the society 
without any discrimination. 
(2) 
No person or institution, whether public or private, shall discriminate 
against persons with disabilities or violate their rights or restrict benefits in any manner. 
(3) 
The government shall take all necessary legal and administrative steps 
including appropriate changes in the existing laws, to ensure that every person with 
disabilities enjoy a life inclusive of the right of equality guaranteed under the 
Constitution and that such person‘s disability shall not be used by any  person or 
institution to restrain or restrict him from enjoying his rights unless there is a reasonable 
cause that not restricting such person may cause him harm or letting him perform 
something may be out of his physical or mental capacity. 
(4). 
In view of restricted access of the persons with disabilities to means of 
earning their livelihood independently, the government shall take extraordinary steps to 
ensure their effective inclusiveness in the society through suitable education, skill 
development, training and placement against appropriate positions in the government 
departments and entities in the private sector according to the allocated quota. 
(5) 
No person with disability shall be a subject of any research without his 
willingness or consent without any pressure and such research shall be through using 
accessible modes, means and formats of communication. 
                                                          
 Now Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules,2020. 

Page -134                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
4. 
Equality before law.- (1) 
The government shall ensure that the 
persons with disabilities are treated equally like persons without such disabilities and that 
they are not discriminated in exercise of their rights. 
(2) 
It shall be ensured that such persons have legal capacity to enjoy their 
rights and if they need support to exercise legal capacity such support is provided to them 
free of cost.  
5. 
Right to privacy.- (1) Every person with disabilities shall have right to 
privacy as available to all citizens regardless of his living in a private home, rehabilitation 
Centre, hostel or any private or public accommodation. 
(2) 
No person with disabilities regardless of place of residence or living 
arrangements shall be subjected to arbitrary or unlawful interference with his privacy of 
person, family, home and communication or correspondence. Such persons shall have the 
right to the protection of the law against any illegal interference and attack against their 
person, family, property and reputation. 
6. 
Women, children, elderly people and transgender with disabilities.- 
(1) In view of the extraordinary vulnerability of women, children, senior citizens and 
transgender with disabilities, the government shall in prescribed manner take special 
measures to ensure that such women, children, seniors citizens and transgenders with 
disabilities are given full protection under law in enjoying their rights. 
(2) 
The government as well as the private sector shall in the prescribed 
manners take necessary measures to ensure development, advancement and 
empowerment of women, children, senior citizens and transgender with disabilities. 
7. 
Ease of access and mobility.- (1) The government as well as the private 
sector shall take necessary measures towards allowing ease of access to the persons with 
disabilities to public buildings, hospital, recreational facilities, public transport, streets 
and roads for which the old buildings and vehicles shall be appropriately modified and 
new buildings and vehicles shall be built conforming to appropriate standards in 
conformity with guidelines developed by the Council: 
 
Provided that the government shall ensure accessible washrooms, toilets 
and bathrooms with all the facilities and necessary accessories. 
(2) 
The council shall develop a guideline on removing barriers and obstacles 
to access in buildings, roads, mode of transportation, housing, hospitals, schools, 
workplaces, communication and information related services, recreational spaces, parks 
and also public washrooms and get those implemented by the concerned authorities and 
persons both in public and private sectors. 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -135 
 
 
(3) 
The Council shall develop a set of minimum standards and scope of 
access and related signage that each department, authority, entity and major enterprise 
shall put in place to ensure necessary access of persons with disabilities. 
(4) 
The government shall implement policies and programs to promote the 
personal mobility of persons with disabilities at affordable cost or free. 
(5) 
The government shall ensure special seats in all means of transport for 
persons with disabilities and allot parking space exclusively for persons with disabilities 
at all public and private places. 
(6) 
The Council shall develop and enforce guidelines allowing persons with 
disabilities to have full and appropriate access to all forms of mass communication 
including information technology to enjoy freedom of speech and freedom of 
information. A national relay system may be established to standardize mechanism 
understandable consistently across the country. 
8. 
Protection from abusive, violent and intolerant discriminatory 
behavior.-  (1) The government shall take all possible steps to protect persons with 
disabilities from all forms of abuse, violence and exploitation at the hands of any person, 
institution or authority. 
(2) 
Whenever an act of abuse, violence and intolerant discriminatory 
behavior is committed against any person with disability and the information of such act 
is communicated to the Council or any law enforcement agency, the concerned on receipt 
of such information shall immediately take necessary action to investigate and curb such 
act and to take appropriate measures under law to lodge the victim of abuse, violence or 
intolerance, to a safe place for protected housing. No cost shall be recovered from such 
victim for lodging in safe place in such situation. 
(3) 
Notwithstanding the provisions of any law for the time being in force, an 
act of physical violence against a person with disability causing even a minor injury shall 
be deemed as grievous injury and shall be treated as an act of violence under section 335 
of the Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 (Act XLV of 1860) and shall attract punishment 
accordingly, other situation of aggravated abuse and violence shall also be deemed to 
have more gravity than in case of a person without disabilities. 
(4) 
In case of need for legal aid such aid shall be made available to such 
affected person at public expense or prevent its occurrence, as the case may be, or pass 
such order as deemed fit for the protection of such person with disability. 
9. 
Equity in education.- (1) The government shall take all necessary 
measures to ensure that persons with disabilities are afforded equal rights to access 
government as well as private educational institutions and shall be provided with 
appropriate facilities for their education without any discrimination. 

Page -136                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
(2) 
The government shall provide free pre-primary to higher education to 
persons with disabilities. 
(3) 
The government shall take necessary measures to establish special 
educational institutions for persons with moderate to severe disabilities to cater to their 
special needs, in addition to making other institutions reasonably equipped and staffed to 
provide appropriate facilities for inclusive education to such persons in those general 
educational institutions. 
(4) 
Persons with disabilities shall not be denied admission into any 
educational institution, whether state owned or private, on ground of their disabilities. 
(5) 
It shall be illegal for an institution and its staff members to discriminate 
against or abuse or otherwise violate rights of a person with disability at his place of 
education for which both the institution and such violating person shall be punished. 
(6) 
The government shall ensure inclusive education focusing on personality, 
development, creativity and strengthening of physical and mental capabilities of persons 
with disabilities. 
(7) 
Reasonable and appropriate accommodation shall be provided to persons 
with disabilities in educational institutions including hostels, where applicable. 
(8) 
The government shall establish adequate dedicated and general facilities 
for teacher training with a view to train adequate number of specially trained teachers 
equipped with skills to teach students with various disabilities. 
(9) 
The government shall ensure that all persons with disabilities are given 
full access to all modes and means of education including but not limited to vocational 
training, online education distance learning and adult education. 
10 
Equity in the employment. - (1) No person, institution, organization or 
entity, whether public or private, shall discriminate against a person on the ground of 
disability in the matters of employment, promotion, career development and enjoying 
fruits of his employment. 
(2) 
The employer shall ensure the provision of reasonable accommodation 
including necessary assistive aid and equipment which a person with disabilities would 
reasonably require to perform his duties. 
(3)  
The government shall reserve an employment quota as prescribed by the 
Federal Government to be periodically reviewed, at various levels for persons with 
disabilities in government departments, institutions, entities and corporate entities owned 
and managed by the government and the concerned department shall implement the 
allocated quota. 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -137 
 
 
(4) 
 The government shall take necessary steps to encourage private 
enterprises to employ persons with disabilities through incentives for which the 
government shall prepare long term inclusion plans and allocate necessary resources. 
(5) 
The terms and conditions of employment shall not be less favorable for 
persons with disabilities as compared with those offered to other persons appointed 
against same or similar positions. 
(6) 
An establishment which does not employ persons with disabilities as 
required by sub-section (3) shall pay into the Fund each  month the sum of money it 
would  have paid as salary or wages to a person with disabilities had he been employed. 
In the event of non-payment or non-compliance, the matter shall be brought before an 
arbitration council to be established for the purpose by the by the Council. 
11 
Equity in health and medical rehabilitation services.- (1) The 
government shall ensure barrier free access to necessary public health services and 
infrastructure to persons with disabilities without any discrimination and without any cast 
to such persons. 
(2) 
The council shall devise plans to provide special health insurance to 
persons with disabilities to ensure free medical coverage to such persons. 
(3) 
The government shall encourage private sector health services providers 
through appropriate incentives to provide quality services to persons with disabilities at 
affordable rates or free. 
(4) 
Special health service for early identification and intervention of 
disabilities and medical service especially designed to prevent disability shall be 
implemented. 
(5) 
The government shall initiate with the help of medical and scientific 
community, reach to identify causes of various disabilities and make efforts to create 
awareness in public to adopt practices that help prevent disabilities from happening. 
(6) 
The government shall in respect of person with disabilities undertake 
initiatives to promote support and implement community based rehabilitation and 
research initiative at the community level. 
12 
Right to live independently in community.- (1) The persons with 
disabilities shall have equal right to alive independently in the community. Such persons 
shall be provided with all necessary facilities by the government without discrimination 
to enable them to live independently. 

Page -138                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
(2) 
The government shall take necessary preventive measures to ensure that 
persons with disabilities are not excluded or segregated from the community on basis of 
their disability and that their access to communal facilities and services is restriction free. 
(3) 
The government may also take necessary measures to enable the person 
with disabilities to have access to a range of in-house, residential and other community 
support services including personal assistance service necessary to support living and 
inclusion in community. 
13. 
Right of living.-(1) Every person with disability shall have right to a 
decent place of living of his choice and no person shall discriminate against a person with 
disability by way of refusing to rent him or sell to a place of living because of him being 
a person with disability. 
(2) 
The government shall evolve a policy towards fair and affordable housing 
for persons with disabilities in government owned, sponsored or assisted projects and 
also in the private housing schemes. The authorities approving establishment of new 
housing schemes and plans shall ensure that appropriate number of affordable housing 
units are included in each such scheme or plan. 
(3) 
The government may set up maintain decent housing facilities for the 
persons with disabilities who do not have a place to live and need a decent temporary 
shelter. The Council shall with the help from the authorities of the Federal Capital, civil 
society organizations and society at large assist to arrange temporary shelter for such 
persons. 
 
14. 
Right to home and family- (1) No person with disability especially a 
child or adult or senior citizen shall be separated from his family on the grounds of 
disability unless a court of law requires him to be so separated in his best interest. 
(2) 
Where the immediate family of person with disability is unable to cater a 
person with disability, especially a child with disabilities, the Court shall make effort to 
place such person at a setup suitable for his safe living. 
(3) 
All persons with disabilities shall have the right to marry a person of their 
own choice and raise their family without any discrimination. 
(4) 
No person with disability shall be subjected to any medical procedure 
leading to infertility and forced sterilization shall be a non-compoundable offence. 
(5) 
The government shall provide free services regarding reproductive health 
especially to women with disabilities. 
15. 
Freedom of expression and information.-(1) The 
government 
shall 
ensure that persons with disabilities have full and equitable rights regarding freedom of 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -139 
 
 
speech, right to expression and information and effective measures shall be taken for their 
such rights to be enjoyed. 
(2) 
The Council shall take necessary measures to convey the voice of persons 
with disabilities and their organizations across the governments, civil society and 
international community. 
(3) 
The Council shall encourage the state and private run electronic and print 
media to promote awareness on the rights of persons with disabilities through public 
service messages and programming inclusive for all types of disabilities. 
(4) 
The government may provide advertisements to publications dedicated 
for persons with disabilities. 
(5) 
The government shall ensure that all websites hosted by Pakistani website 
service providers are accessible for persons with disabilities. 
16. 
Right of political participation.- (1) Persons with disabilities shall 
have full right to participate in the political activity in the country including exercising 
right of vote and right to be elected to an elected body. 
(2) 
The election Commission of Pakistan shall ensure that each polling 
station is accessible to persons with disabilities and necessary arrangements are made for 
them to case their Votes confidentially and without any difficulty. Any act by any person 
to cause restriction on exercise of right of vote by a person with disability shall be 
deemed as forceful obstruction as defined in the Election Act, 2017 (XXXIII of 2017) 
and shall be prosecuted and punished accordingly. 
(3) 
The Council shall, with the help of the Election Commission of Pakistan, 
educate political parties on the issues and problems of the persons with disabilities. 
(4) 
The Election Commission of Pakistan shall be mandated to develop voter‘s 
accessibility mechanism for persons with disabilities such as brail voting paper etc. 
17. 
Access to Justice:- The government shall ensure that persons with 
disabilities are provided with assistance, including sign language interpreters and 
attendants to access to the justice system. 
18. 
Right to own property.- Persons with disabilities shall not be denied the 
right to own, sell or inherit property. 
19. 
Participation in Sports, cultural and recreational activities.- (1) The 
government shall ensure that no person is discriminated against in participation of any 
sports, games, cultural and recreational activities on ground of his disability. Assistive 
devices, equipment and latest technology shall be made available for their inclusion in 
sports, culture, recreational and leisure activities. One seat for persons with disabilities in 

Page -140                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
the sports board shall be ensured and the government shall ensure linkages of the 
monitoring mechanism for para Olympics and special Olympics sports association. 
(2) 
Access to cultural materials, programs and activities shall be provided in 
accessible and appropriate formats to person with disabilities. 
(3) 
Barrier-free and discrimination-free access to media programs, films, 
theaters, parks, stadiums, play grounds, beaches and other places of leisure, recreation, 
sports and cultural activities shall be provided to such persons with disabilities. 
(4) 
The government shall facilitate participation of persons with disabilities 
in scouting, art classes, outdoor camps, hunting, tourism and adventure activities and 
shall also help to develop and utilize their artistic, creative and intellectual capabilities. 
(5) 
The government shall ensure that talent-enhancing abilities in both public 
and private schools including sports activities are developed. 
(6) 
The government shall ensure that courses and activities are designed to 
promote arts and culture to enhance talent of persons with disabilities. 
(7) 
The government shall take steps so that access to cultural materials, 
programs and activities in accessible and appropriate formats to persons with disabilities 
are ensured. 
20. 
Protection of persons with disabilities in risk and disaster situation.- 
(1) All persons with disabilities shall be given top priority in providing suitable 
protection and safety in situations of risk and natural disaster and shall immediately be 
removed from such areas and moved to a safe place on priority.  
(2) 
In situations of armed conflict, the police, civil armed forces and the 
armed forces shall take appropriate measures on priority to ensure safety, protection and 
removal of such persons. 
(3) 
All authorities engaged in reconstruction activity subsequent to any 
situation of armed conflict, humanitarian emergencies or natural disaster shall ensure that 
persons with disabilities are accorded priority in reconstructing their institutions, homes 
and other facilities and restoring services. 
(4) 
The Council shall keep a close coordination with the disaster 
management authorities for protection and removal to safety and keep record of such 
persons caught in such situation and ensure early rehabilitation. 
(5) 
Needs and concerns of persons with disabilities should be included in 
disaster risk reduction. 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -141 
 
 
PART III 
ADMINISTRATION OF RIGHTS 
 
21. 
Strengthening and reconstitution of the National Council for the 
Rehabilitation of Disabled Persons.- (1) The National Council for the Rehabilitation of 
Disabled Persons constituted under the Disabled Persons (Employment and 
Rehabilitation) Ordinance, 1981 (XL of 1981) shall stand reconstituted as the Council on 
Rights of Persons with Disabilities and shall consist of- 
(a) 
Minister-in-Charge; 
Chairperson 
(b) 
Secretary of the Division allocated with business of 
this Act; 
Vice Chairperson 
(c) 
Two members from the Senate, one each from 
government and the opposition; 
Members 
(d) 
Two members from the National Assembly one 
each from government and the opposition; 
Members 
(e) 
One representative from Ministry of Information, 
Broadcasting, 
National 
History 
and 
Literary 
Heritage not below the rank of Joint Secretary; 
Member 
(f) 
One representative from Ministry of Finance, 
Revenue and Economic Affairs not below the rank 
of Joint Secretary; 
Member 
(g) 
One representative from the Division allocated with 
business of education not below the level of Joint 
Secretary; 
Member 
(h) 
One representative from the Division allocated with 
the business of poverty alleviation and social safety 
not below the rank of Joint Secretary; 
Member 
(i) 
An officer not below the rank of a Joint Secretary of 
the Division to which business of this Act stands 
allocated; 
Member 
(j) 
Chairman, Capital Development Authority (CDA); 
Member 
(k) 
Chief Executive or Head of National Institute of 
Rehabilitation Medicine (NIRM) 
Member 
(l) 
Three persons with disability 
Members 
 
(2) 
Member at clause (i) of sub-section (1) shall also act as Secretary of the 
Council. 
(3) 
The Council may co-opt any person as a member. 
(4) 
The government functionaries represented in the Council shall hold their 
memberships on ex officio basis. The tenure of the members shall be three years. 

Page -142                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
(5) 
The Council shall meet at-least quarterly and the quorum of each meeting 
shall be one-fourth of the total number of the composition of the Council. 
22. 
Function of the Council.- (1) The Council shall have the responsibility 
to achieve and implement objectives of this Act and to assist the government in 
developing legal and institutional frame work. 
(2) 
The Council shall be the executive authority to implement this Act, to 
develop a legal and social environment and to help persons with disabilities to have the 
protection of law in enjoying their fundamental rights. 
(3) 
The Council shall, with the help of other authorities and persons, take all 
possible measures to protect persons with disabilities from discrimination, exploitation, 
torture, inhuman or degrading treatment on the hands of any one including their families 
and caregivers. 
(4) 
The Council shall coordinate implementation of the principles of relevant 
convention at provincial and lower administrative levels through providing technical 
assistance to various organs of the provincial legislatures and governments in developing 
appropriate legal and institutional frameworks in their jurisdictions and making them 
achieve the objective of protection and enforcement of rights. 
(5) 
The Council shall evaluate the effectiveness of laws and policies and 
assess the implementation of laws and policies at the national level and recommend to the 
government any changes required in the policies, laws and practices. 
(6) 
The Council shall conduct or cause to conduct research on the status of 
persons with disabilities and matters related to the promotion and protection of their rights. 
(7) 
The Council shall put into place an institutional mechanism to regularly 
monitor performance of various departments and organizations in the government and 
issue a performance score card to each such entity and organization at least once in every 
three years. Similarly, the Council shall devise and maintain score cards for private 
entities that seek such evaluation and assessment. Such performance audits shall be 
conducted by third party professionals and the employees of the Council. 
(8) 
The Council shall assess its own performance in creating legal and social 
environment in the country and issue an annual status report at the end of every calendar 
year to present its report to the Parliament through Minister-in-charge. 
(9) 
The Council shall be responsible to monitor the activities of private and 
community bases organizations to ensure that required standards of service are 
maintained. The Council may enforce and institutional mechanism for effective, 
efficacious and transparent functions of such organizations and may impose restrictions 
on organizations not meeting the objective criteria laid down by it.  

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -143 
 
 
(10) The Council shall have the powers to address individual and collective 
complaints of violations of human rights of persons with disabilities. 
23. 
Registration of persons with disabilities.-(1) Any person with disability 
desirous of being employed or otherwise rehabilitated may have his name registered in 
the register maintained by the Council or its designated office in such form and in such 
manner as may be prescribed by the Council. 
(2) 
The Council shall, if it thinks necessary, cause each person with the 
disability registered under sub-section(1) to be assessed as to the nature of his functional 
disability and also as to his aptitude and the nature of work he is fit to do by a medical 
officer authorized by it or by such assessing board as it may appoint having at least one 
medical officer and the medical officer or, as the case may be, the assessing board shall 
submit its report to the Council in such form as may be prescribed by the Council. 
(3) 
If the person with disability is considered by the Council fit to work, he 
shall be informed indicating the nature of work for which he may be employed or the 
trade or vocation in which he may be trained and an endorsement to that  effect shall be 
made against his name in the register. 
(4) 
If the person with disability is not considered by the Council fit to work, 
he shall be informed accordingly for an endorsement to that effect being made against his 
name in the register and the Council shall take such measures for his rehabilitation as it 
thinks fit. 
(5) 
If a person is declared by the Council not to be a disabled person, his 
name shall be struck off from the register. 
24. 
Establishment to employ persons with disabilities.- (1) Not less than 
one percent of the total number of persons employed by and establishment at any time 
shall be persons whose names have been registered with the Council or its designated 
office of the area in which such establishment is located and against whose names in the 
register maintained under section 23 an-endorsement exists to the effect that they are fit 
to work. 
(2) 
The persons with disabilities employed against any post in pursuance of 
sub-section(1) shall be entitled to the terms and conditions which are not less favourable 
than those of the other persons employed by the establishment against similar posts. 
(3) 
When calculating the percentage of the posts in an establishment for the 
purposes of employment of persons with disabilities, the fraction of 0.5 and above shall 
count as a whole-number. 
25. 
Establishment to pay to the Fund.- An establishment which does not 
employ a person with disability as required by section 24 shall pay in the Fund each 

Page -144                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
month the sum of money it would have paid as salary or wages to a disabled person had 
he been employed. 
26. 
Dissolution of the Council.- On the commencement of this Act, the 
council formed under the Disable Persons (Employment and Rehabilitation) Ordinance, 
1981 (XL of 1981) shall stand dissolved and on such dissolution all assets, rights, 
powers, authorities and privileges and property, movable and immovable, cash and bank 
balance, reserve funds, investments and all other interests and rights in, or arising out of 
such property and all debts, liabilities and obligations of whatever kind of the dissolved 
council subsisting immediately before its dissolution shall stand transferred to and vest in 
the Council. 
27. 
Government authorities and other persons to assist the Council.- (1) 
All the functionaries of the government shall extend full and effective cooperation to the 
Council in ensuring the enforcement of this Act and other laws for protecting the rights of 
the persons with disabilities. 
(2) 
Any person in the governmental position not effectively cooperating with 
the Council shall be deemed to have committed misconduct and shall be proceeded 
against accordingly. 
28. 
Funds for rehabilitation.- (1) The government may establish non-
lapsable endowment fund for sustainably financing projects and activities related to 
ensuring effective rights protection and inclusion in society of persons with disabilities. 
(2) 
The Fund established under sub-section (1) shall be called as ICT 
Disability Fund which shall be managed by the Council. 
(3) 
The following shall be the sources of the Fund, namely:- 
(a) 
annual allocation and grants of funds from Federal Government; 
(b) 
grants from international organizations, governments and other such 
bodies; 
(c) 
levies and other charges that government imposes for rehabilitation; 
(d) 
fines and penalties under this Act; 
(e) 
donations and bequests by private persons; and 
(f) 
any other source. 
(4) 
The Fund established under the Disabled Persons (Employment and 
Rehabilitation) Ordinance, 1981 (XL of 1981) shall stand transferred alongwith all sums 
and moneys to the Fund established under sub-section (2). 
29. 
Creating public awareness.- (1) The Council shall take immediate, 
appropriate and result oriented measures to raise awareness amongst the society as whole 
with regards to recognition and respect for persons with disabilities and their rights. 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -145 
 
 
(2) 
The Council shall recommend to the Federal and Provincial Governments 
measures to include topics on disability in educational curriculum and to create 
awareness among young students about persons with disabilities. 
(3) 
The government shall include topics on addressing problems of persons 
with disabilities in training programs of institutions responsible for imparting trainings to 
officers and officials of the government, including judges and court officials. 
30. 
Rehabilitation.- (1) The government shall take all possible measures to 
ensure that persons with disabilities attain maximum independence and ability to 
participate in activities of life including getting education, doing business, getting 
employed and participating in sports and cultural activities. 
(2) 
The government shall promote continuing skill development and training 
in existing advance skills and technologies to persons with disabilities for effective 
participation and integration in the community. 
(3) 
The government shall undertake initiatives to promote, support and 
implement community bases rehabilitation and research initiatives of its own. 
31. 
Insurance cover.-(1) the Council may devise and put in place 
comprehensive group medical and accident insurance for persons with disabilities and 
may also facilitate such persons in getting affordable life and other forms of insurance. 
(2) 
The Council may pay the premium for persons with disabilities who 
cannot pay the premium from their own sources. 
32. 
Special disability courts.- (1) For speedy justice, the government may 
designate and may encourage provincial governments to designate, courts to hear cases 
under this Act or other laws in which one or more parties are persons with disabilities. 
(2) 
There shall be an effective institutionalized mechanism to monitor cases 
in courts under sub-section (1) by appropriate judicial forums as devised by the 
respective High Court. 
33. 
Power to make rules.-  (1) The Council may, in consultation with the 
Federal Government and by notification in the official Gazette, make rules to carry out 
purposes of this Act. 
(2) 
The rules made under the Disabled Persons (Employment and 
rehabilitation) Ordinance, 1981 (XL of 1981) so far as they are not inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Act shall continue to be in force until  altered, amended or repealed. 
34. 
Power to make regulation.- The Council may, by notification in the 
official Gazette, make regulations for its own efficient and professional working and for 
effective achievement of objectives of this Act. 

Page -146                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
PART IV 
MISCELLANEOUS 
 
35. 
Removal of difficulties.- If any difficulty arises in giving effect to any 
of the provisions of this Act, the Federal Government may make such order, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary for the 
purpose of removing the difficulty. 
 
36. 
Repeal.- The Disabled Persons (Employment and Rehabilitation) 
Ordinance, 1981 (XL of 1981) is, to the extent of Islamabad Capital Territory, hereby 
repealed. 
 
4.12 Uniform Instructions on 2% Disability Quota  
 
 
Refer to the subject cited above and to say that at present the quota reserved for 
―Person with Disability‖ (PWD‘s) is reserved at 2% in the Federal Government. The Prime 
Minister has been pleased to direct that the said quota of 2% is to be implemented against 
total strength of Ministries/Divisions/Departments. It is further stated:— 
a. 
Disabled Persons (Employment and Rehabilitation) Ordinance,1981 and now 
―ICT Rights of Person with Disabilities Act,2020‖, promulgated on 23rd 
September,2020 provides reservation of quota on the total number of persons 
employed by an establishment (on the overall strength of the organization 
concerned and not against each basic scale). 
b. 
The total number of persons employed means the total sanctioned posts of the 
establishment, that is, an Organization, Authority, Department or Ministry. 
This should apply such that 2% of the total sanctioned posts or workforce of 
the establishment becomes the Disability Quota for that establishment. 
 
2. 
All the instructions, issued by the Establishment Division on the subject from time to 
time, may be deemed to have been superseded.  
[Authority:– Estt Division‘s O.M.No.34/3/86-R-V, dated 18-06-2021]. 
    
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -147 
 
 
V. DETERMINATION OF DOMICILE 
 
5.1 
Determination of Domicile 
 
Reference Establishment Division's O.M. No. 2/2/67-D.V., dated the 26th August, 
1968. It has been observed that the instructions contained therein for determining the domicile 
of candidates while making appointment to posts are not being complied with faithfully in 
some cases.  These instructions clearly provide that a candidate belonging to Pakistan by 
origin should be considered for appointment on the basis of domicile of his father. Similarly, a 
migrant candidate should be considered only against the quota of the province/region where 
his parents are domiciled and where they have resided for at least three years.  In case the 
parents of a migrant candidate have not migrated to Pakistan, he should be considered for 
appointment on the basis of his own domicile.  All the Ministries/Divisions are requested that, 
while making ad-hoc appointments against the posts required to be filled through FPSC, they 
should carefully examine the domicile of the candidates in the light of the above instructions. 
This may also kindly be brought to the notice of all the departments/organizations under their 
administrative control for strict compliance. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.2/2/77-W.C/R.2 dated 13-10-1987]. 
5.2 
Determination of Domicile for the Purpose of  
Appointments Against Provincial/Regional Quotas 
 
According to the decisions contained in the Establishment Division Office 
Memorandum No.25/113/ 54-SE I, dated the 4th January, 1956 (Annex-I)  and Office 
Memorandum No. 1/12/56-R, dated the 14th February, 1958 (Annex-II), while a 
candidate belonging to Pakistan by origin can claim appointment only against the quota 
of the province/ region to which the father of such a candidate belongs, the candidates 
who have migrated to Pakistan have different options for claiming appointment against 
provincial/regional quotas.  The matter has, therefore, been reconsidered with a view to 
rationalizing the policy regarding determination of domicile of the candidates for 
government service, and the following revised orders are issued, in partial modification 
of the existing instructions:— 
(i) 
There should be no change in the policy regarding the persons belonging 
to Pakistan by origin, i.e., they should continue to be considered for 
appointment only against the quota of the province/region to which the 
father of such a candidate belongs. 
(ii) 
A migrant candidate, whether residing in Pakistan or abroad, should be 
considered for appointment only against the quota of the province/region 
where his parents are domiciled and where they have resided for at least 3 
years.  However, the condition of 3 years' residence should be deemed to 
be fulfilled if the parents are officially domiciled in a particular 
province/region but have been living in some other areas for a number of 
years due to exigencies of service. For this purpose, the candidate will be 
required to produce a domicile certificate from a competent authority that 
his parents are domiciled in the province/region concerned. 
(iii) In case the parents of a migrant candidate have not been considered for 
appointment against the quota of the province/region where he himself is 
domiciled and has resided or has been educated for a continuous period of 

Page -148                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
three years immediately before applying for appointment and 
consideration against the quota of a province/region. 
 
2.  
The decisions above may please be brought to the notice of all concerned 
for guidance in future. 
 [Authority:– Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No.2/2/67-DV, dated 26-8-1968]. 
(ANNEX I) 
(See 5.2 para 1) 
[Copy of Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.25/113/54-SEI, dated the 4th January, 1956]. 
 
Provincial Quotas on the Basis of Domicile Certificates: The recruitment policy 
of government, according to which recruitment to the Central Services is made, is based 
on a system of Provincial quotas.  These quotas were meant for candidates who belonged 
by origin to the provinces of Pakistan, or who, on migration from Indian provinces had 
permanently settled down in one of the Pakistan Provinces.  However, by means of 
domicile certificates, a large number of candidates who had come over from India but 
had not permanently settled in any Pakistan Province were able to enter the *Central 
Services, thus shutting out candidates belonging by origin to Pakistan provinces from 
their due share in the administration of the country.  What these candidates did was to file 
declarations before District Magistrates, to the effect that they had renounced their 
previous domicile and that they had resided for over a year in such provinces as (East 
Bengal), Sindh and the **N.W.F.P., where competitive conditions were comparatively 
easier.  Having obtained such certificates of domicile on the strength of these 
declarations, the veracity of which could seldom be properly checked, these candidates 
would leave that particular province and have no further connection with it.  They would 
then prepare themselves for examinations in areas where educational facilities were better 
but, by virtue of their domicile certificates, they demanded to be considered for 
appointment against the quota of one of the above provinces in which they claimed to be 
domiciled, provided, of course, that they had qualified in the examinations.  In actual 
fact, the Domicile Certificate merely made a refugee candidate eligible for appearing in 
an examination for appointment to a post in Pakistan and did not confer any right on him 
to be appointed against the quota of a particular province. 
 
2.  
In order to ensure that government's recruitment policy is properly carried 
out and that no candidate enters the *Central Services against the quota of a province 
who does not belong to that province either by origin or through settling down 
permanently there, government consider it necessary to provide a check against the entry 
into the Central* Services of candidates who claim to be considered against provincial 
quotas on spurious grounds.  It has, therefore, been decided that, in the case of candidates 
who qualify for appointment to the *Central Services, but who do not belong, by origin, 
to any Pakistan province, they should be admitted against the quota of the province in 
which they claim to have settled permanently, provided there is proof of three years' 
residence/ education in the province against whose quota they claim to be considered.  
                                                          
 ‗Federal Services/Groups‘. 
** Now Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -149 
 
 
This can be established in most cases from educational certificates which the candidates 
will file with their application.  In other cases, where a candidate has been educated in a 
province for a shorter period although he claims to have resided there for 3 years, other 
evidence must be produced by the candidate to support his claim.  In the case, however, 
of a refugee candidate studying abroad, or in some parts of Pakistan other than the 
province against whose quota he claims to be considered, the condition of three years' 
residence in that Province should be deemed to be satisfied, if the parents of such a 
candidate have resided in the Province in question for three years. 
 
3.  
The decision outlined in the preceding paragraph does not mean that 
refugee candidates, who fail to prove their claim that they belong to a particular area, are 
shut out from appointments to the *Central Services.  As Ministries are aware, the 
recruitment policy provides a 20% merit quota and a refugee candidate, who does not 
satisfy the above requirements, can take his chance in that quota.  Finally, it may be 
added that, in the case of a candidate whose father belongs by birth or by origin to a 
Pakistan province, it is immaterial where he has received his education or has resided. 
Such a candidate will be considered, for appointment against the quota of vacancies 
reserved for that province without any check. 
 
4.  
The above decision will not be affected by the coming into existence of 
one province in West Pakistan as no change in the existing recruitment policy is 
contemplated. The recruitment policy in respect of services and posts under the *Central 
Government will continue to operate in those areas which constitute the previous 
Provinces and which will now be expressed in terms of districts comprising those areas. 
(ANNEX II) 
(See 5.2, para 1) 
 
[Copy of Establishment Division Office Memorandum No. 1/12/56-R, dated 
the 14th February, 1958]. 
 
Attention is invited to the Establishment Division Office Memorandum No. 
25/113/54-SEI, dated the 4th January, 1956 in which instructions were issued that in the case 
of a refugee candidate studying abroad or in some parts of Pakistan other than the province 
against whose quota he claims to be considered, the conditions of three years' residence in that 
province should be deemed to be satisfied, if the parents of such a candidate have resided in 
the province in question for three years.  It, therefore, follows by implication that in the case of 
those candidates, whose parents have acquired the domicile in a province/zone, but who, due 
to the exigencies of service, have been serving outside that province/zone, for a number of 
years, the conditions of 3 years residence for that province (for the candidate) will be deemed 
to have been fulfilled for the purpose of being considered against the quota of that 
province/zone. 
5.3 
Married Female Candidates -  
Determination of Domicile  
 
According to the decisions contained in the Estt. Division‘s O.M No. 
2/2/67-DV, dated  the 26th August, 1968, the domicile of a candidate is to be determined 
                                                          
* Federal. 

Page -150                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
on the basis of the domicile of his or her parents and if the parents of a migrant candidate 
have not migrated to Pakistan, on the basis of his or her own residence and education in 
the province in which he or she is domiciled. A question has arisen whether a female 
married candidate can be considered to have the same domicile as that of her husband.  
The matter has been considered and it has been decided that the domicile of a married 
female candidate may be accepted to be the same as that of her husband for the purposes 
of direct recruitment. 
 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.F.8/5/75-WC, dated 12-8-1975]. 
5.4 
Candidates Not Required to Show Place of Birth 
of their Fathers for Purposes of Domicile 
 
As the Ministries/ Divisions are aware, the government observes provincial/ 
regional quotas in filling vacancies reserved for direct recruitment to posts under the 
Federal Government. It has been brought to the notice of the government that candidates 
for appointment to federal posts are sometimes required to state the place of birth of their 
father.  This information is not relevant to the determination of domicile of a candidate. 
The government have, therefore, decided that, in future, no candidate will be asked to 
state the place of birth of his father. However, the requirement of stating the domicile of 
father and other particulars like name, address etc., will continue to be observed as 
before. 
 
2. 
The Ministries/Divisions are requested to give wide publicity to these 
instructions. 
 
[Authority:– Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.2/5/77/WC/R-IX, dated 11-1-1978]. 
5.5 
Change of Domicile After Entry  
into Government Service 
 
A question has arisen whether a person who entered (into) government service 
on the basis of domicile of a particular province/ region of Pakistan can subsequently 
change his domicile during his service.  As a citizen of Pakistan, a government servant 
can change his domicile according to the law and the rules made thereunder. It has, 
however, been decided that the domicile of a government servant as declared by him and 
accepted by government at the time of entry into government service should be treated as 
final throughout his service career and no subsequent change in his domicile should be 
recognized for the purpose of terms and conditions of his service including his allocation 
and liability to transfer. 
[Authority:– Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No.1/14/71-TRV, dated 20-9-1971]. 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -151 
 
 
VI.    COMPETITIVE EXAMINATIONS 
 
6.1 
CSS-Competitive Examination Rules,2019 
 
S.R.O. No. 1452(I)/2018.–  In exercise of the powers conferred by sections 7A and 
10 of the Federal Public Service Commission Ordinance, 1977 (XLV of 1977), the Chairman 
of the  Federal Public Service Commission,  with the approval of the Federal Government, is 
pleased to make the following rules, namely:— 
 
1. 
Short title and commencement.– (1) These rules shall be called the CSS- 
Competitive Examination Rules, 2019. 
 
(2) 
These rules shall come into force at once for competitive examination for the 
years 2019 and onwards. 
 
2. 
Definitions.– Unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,–  
(i) 
―Act‖ means the Civil Servant‗s Act 1973(LXXI of 1973);  
(ii) ―Annexure‖ means an annexure to these rules; 
(iii) ―Appendix‖ means an appendix to these rules; 
(iv) ―candidate‖ means a person who opts by making application in soft or 
written form, as the case may be, to appear for competitive 
examination under these rules; 
(v) ―competitive examination‖ means the competitive examination 
conducted under these rules in respect of the occupational groups and 
services; 
(vi) ―Occupational Groups or Services‖ means the Occupational Groups 
and Services as specified in the Occupational Groups and Services 
(Probation, Training and Seniority) Rules, 1990; and  
(vii) ―Ordinance‖ means the Federal Public Service Commission 
Ordinance, 1977 (XLV of 1977);    
 
3. 
Competitive examination.– (1) The competitive examination shall be conducted 
by the Commission in respect of the Occupational Groups and Services consisting of– 
(a) 
Commerce and Trade Group;  
(b) 
Foreign Service of Pakistan; 
(c) 
Information Group;  
(d) 
Inland Revenue Service; 
(e) 
Military Lands and Cantonments Group;  
(f) 
Office Management Group; 
(g) 
Pakistan Administrative Service; 
(h) 
Pakistan Audit and Accounts Service; 
(i) 
Pakistan Customs Service; 
(j) 
Police Service of Pakistan; 
(k) 
Postal Group; and 
(l) 
Railways (Commercial and Transportation) Group. 
 
(2) 
The competitive examination shall comprise the following, namely:-  

Page -152                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
(a) written examination;  
(b) medical examination: 
(c) psychological assessment; and 
(d) viva voce.    
 
(3)  Written examination shall be conducted annually by the Commission 
simultaneously at Abbottabad, Bahawalpur, Dera Ghazi Khan, Dera Ismail Khan, 
Faisalabad, Gilgit, Gujranwala, Hyderabad, Islamabad, Karachi, Lahore, Larkana, Multan, 
Muzaffarabad, Peshawar, Quetta, Rawalpindi, Sargodha and Sukkur and any other place as 
the Commission may determine depending on the number of applicants for each centre.  
 
(4) 
Written examination under sub-rule (2) shall be held after schedule thereof is 
advertised by the Commission in leading newspapers and uploaded at its website.    
 
(5) 
Depending on the number of applicants, the viva voce shall be held at 
Islamabad, Karachi, Lahore, Multan, Peshawar, Quetta and such other place as the 
Commission may determine. 
 
4. 
Change of centre.– Written examination‗s centre once selected by the 
candidate shall not be changed, unless allowed by the Commission or a committee thereof on 
an application made in this behalf by the candidate.   
 
5. 
Cut-off date for determination of eligibility.– The cutoff date for 
determining the eligibility of the candidate in terms of age, qualifications, domicile shall be 
the 31st day of December of the year preceding the year of competitive examination.   
 
Explanation.–  For competitive examination 2019 the cut-off date thereof  shall be 
the  31st day of December, 2018.  
 
6. 
Age-limits.– (1) No candidate shall be eligible for admission to the 
competitive examination unless he is neither below the age of twenty-one years nor above 
the age of thirty years on the cut-off date.  
 
Explanation.–  A candidate born on or before the 31st day of December, 1988 and 
on or after the 2nd  day of January, 1998 shall not be eligible for the competitive examination 
of the year 2019. 
 
(2) 
Two years relaxation in upper-age limit of a candidate shall be admissible in 
respect of the following categories, namely:–  
(a) 
the candidates belonging to the scheduled caste and Buddhist 
community subject to production of a certificate, in support of their 
claim, as set out in the application form prescribed by the Commission 
from time to time and issued by Deputy Commissioner, District 
Magistrate or such other person by whatever name called and 
authorized in this behalf;  
(b) 
the candidates belonging to the recognized Tribes who are permanent 
residents of the areas mentioned-below and whose families have been 
living in these areas, subject to production of a certificate, in support of 
their claim, as set out in the application form prescribed by the 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -153 
 
 
Commission from time to time and issued by Deputy Commissioner, 
District Magistrate or such other person by whatever name called and 
authorized in this behalf:–   
(i) Baluchistan; 
(ii)  Tribal Areas of D.I.Khan and Peshawar Divisions (including 
former Frontier States of Dir, Swat, Chitral and Amb);  
(iii) former excluded (Baloch) area forming part of the Dera Ghazi 
Khan and Rajanpur Districts;  
(iv) former Tribal Areas of Mardan and Hazara Divisions; and  
(v) Upper Tanawal Area of Hazara Division;  
(c)  
the candidates who are permanent residents of Azad Kashmir Territory, 
subject to production of a certificate in support of their claim, as set out 
in the application form prescribed by the Commission from time to time 
and issued by the Division to which business of Azad Jammu and 
Kashmir stands allocated; 
 (d) 
 the candidates who are permanent residents of Gilgit-Baltistan 
including Gilgit, Diamir, Baltistan, Ghizer and Guanche, subject to 
production of a certificate in support of their claim, as set out in the 
application form prescribed by the Commission from time to time and 
issued by the Deputy Commissioner, District Magistrate or such other 
person by whatever name called and authorized in this behalf;  
(e) 
the special candidates, namely, physically impaired, hearing or speech 
impaired and visually impaired, subject to production of certificate of 
disability in support of their claim issued by an officer of the Federal 
Government or, as the case may be, Provincial Government duly 
authorized in this behalf;  
(f) 
in-service Government servants, armed forces personnel, contract 
employees, including the Government servants of Azad Jammu and 
Kashmir, who possess a minimum of two years continuous Government 
service as on the cut-off date subject to production of departmental 
permission certificate from the competent authority as set out by the 
Commission from time to time. Employees of nationalized banks, State 
Bank of Pakistan, Water and Power Development Authority, regulatory 
authorities, autonomous bodies and other semi-autonomous bodies are 
not entitled to the age-relaxation under these rules: 
  
 
Provided that period of extraordinary leave (EOL) shall not be 
considered as period spent on duty under Fundamental Rule-9(6) for 
grant of age-relaxation under these rules. 
(3) 
The relaxation in upper age-limits prescribed in these rules shall be permitted 
upto the maximum period of an individual concession and not by the total period of the 
concessions taken together, if admissible in any case.  

Page -154                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
(4) 
Except as provided in these rules, a candidate shall not be entitled to further 
relaxation in age-limit under any other rule for the time being in force or on any other 
ground.   
7. 
Date of birth.–  (1)  The date of birth entered in the following documents 
shall be accepted by the Commission:–  
(a)    matriculation certificate;  
(b) secondary or higher secondary school leaving certificate;  
(c) certificate of birth from the principal or headmaster of the school from 
where a candidate has passed his general certificate of education (GCE), 
‗O‗ level or equivalent examination, showing the date of birth in the 
school admission register;  
(d) in case of Christian candidates, Baptismal or birth registration certificate.    
(2) 
The decision as to which certificate may be accepted for the purpose of date 
of birth rests with the Commission.   
(3) 
Once a date of birth has been claimed by a candidate and accepted by the 
Commission  for the  purpose  of  admission  to  a competitive examination,  no  change  
shall be  allowed  at  a  subsequent examination or selection.  
 8. 
Educational qualifications.– (1) A candidate for competitive examination 
must hold at least a second division or grade ―C‖ bachelor‗s degree in any faculty of one of 
the Pakistani universities or an equivalent degree or comparable educational qualifications of 
a foreign university recognized by the Higher Education Commission (HEC), subject to 
production of equivalence certificate issued by HEC.   
(2) 
Where a candidate does not hold the required degree on or before the cut-off 
date, he shall be required to produce a certificate from the duly authorized officer of the 
concerned degree awarding institution, to the effect that the candidate has fulfilled all the 
requirements of the said degree and has cleared and passed the examination for the said 
degree on or before the cut-off date. The candidate however would be required to produce 
the said degree before the final result is declared by the Commission.   
 
(3) 
A candidate who has obtained a third division or ‗D‗ grade in his bachelor‗s 
degree shall be eligible for the competitive examination in cases where he has obtained a 
higher division or grade in master‗s degree.  
 
9. 
Nationality.– (1) Candidates for competitive examination must be a citizen of 
Pakistan or a person deriving his nationality from the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(2) 
A candidate who has married a person who is not a citizen of Pakistan shall 
not be eligible for appointment provided that a person who marries a foreign national of any 
country recognized by Federal Government with the prior permission of Government may be 
regarded as eligible for appointment.  
 
10. 
Domicile.– (1) Seats in respect of the Occupational Groups and Services shall 
be allocated in accordance with the policy as may be prescribed by the Federal Government 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -155 
 
 
before finalizing the appointments and for that purpose the candidates shall produce domicile 
certificate issued by the competent authority in accordance with the law and the rules.  
 
(2) 
A candidate who has acquired the citizenship of Pakistan by registration 
under the Pakistan Citizenship Act, 1951 (II of 1951) and the rules made thereunder shall 
produce along with the application an attested copy of the certificate of citizenship. A 
candidate who has not been registered as a citizen of Pakistan but claims that he should be 
deemed to be citizen of Pakistan under the Pakistan Citizenship Act, 1951 (II of 1951) shall 
produce proof to the effect that he fulfills the conditions on the basis of which he claims to be 
deemed as a citizen of Pakistan. A candidate who derives his nationality from the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir shall produce along with the application a certificate issued by the 
Division to which business of the Azad Jammu and Kashmir stands allocated duly signed by 
an officer not below the rank of Deputy Secretary in support of his claim.  
 
(3) 
Candidates of Azad Jammu and Kashmir shall produce domicile certificate 
alongwith permanent residence certificate along with the application forms issued by the 
Division to which business of the Azad Jammu and Kashmir stands allocated duly signed by 
an officer not below the rank of Deputy Secretary in support of his claim. No such 
certificates shall be accepted at any later stage.  
 
(4) 
Domicile once claimed by a candidate and accepted by the Commission for 
the purpose of admission to competitive examination shall be final. No change will be 
allowed at a subsequent examination or selection.  
 
(5) 
Domicile claimed by a candidate and accepted at the time of his first entry 
into Government service shall be treated as final for the purpose of candidature and 
allocation and no subsequent change in his domicile shall be accepted.   
 
11. 
Application for and admission to the competitive examination.– (1) All 
applications for the competitive examination must be made online through the Commission‗s 
website www.fpsc.gov.pk.   
 
(2) 
Online applications under sub-rule (1) must be made on or before the closing 
date as advertised by the Commission.  
 
(3) 
Printed copy of duly filled online application form (i.e. hardcopy) may be 
obtained and after signing it, copies of all documents and certificates as mentioned in 
application form alongwith original treasury receipt may be attached with it and dispatched 
to the Secretary of the Commission, so as to reach the Commission‗s headquarters within ten 
days of the closing date. 
 
(4) 
An online application received incomplete, wrongly filled in or its hardcopy 
not accompanied with any one of the documents mentioned in the application form, shall be 
rejected.  
 
(5) 
Hardcopy of the online application, if reached to the Commission after the 
stipulated period of ten days from the closing date, it shall not be accepted and online form 
already submitted to the Commission shall stand rejected.  

Page -156                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
 
(6) 
Any correction in the printed hard copy of online form may be made by hand 
and initialled before dispatch or submission to the Commission, whereafter no request for 
change in any entry of online application or its hard copy shall be accepted. 
 
(7) 
No plea that hardcopy of online application form or any document attached 
therewith has been lost or delayed in the post shall be entertained. 
 
(8) 
The candidate shall have to pay or deposit two hundred and fifty Rupees in 
the Commission‗s head of account as fine, if hard copy of online application is received 
without signature, subject to no other deficiency in application or attached documents, 
otherwise his application shall stand rejected. 
 
(9) 
Hardcopy of the online application must be dispatched in a separate envelope. 
Two or more applications in one envelope shall not be acceptable.  
 
(10) Candidate shall pay two thousand two hundred Rupees, or such other fee as 
the Commission may determine from time to time, as application fee for competitive 
examination as per procedure prescribed in Appendix-II and deposited in the nearest 
Government‗s treasury or in State Bank or National Bank of Pakistan under the head of 
account ―C02101-Organs of State Exam Fee (FPSC Receipt)‖. Cash, postal orders, bank 
drafts and cheques shall not be accepted by the Commission.   
 
(11) Original treasury receipt for written examination must be attached with the 
application form to be deposited to the Commission.  Without providing original treasury 
receipt, the application of the candidate shall be rejected.  
 
(12) Subjects for the competitive examination shall comprise compulsory papers 
of 600 marks and optional papers of 600 marks as specified in Appendix-I.   
 
(13) Optional subjects must be selected carefully, as wrong selection of subjects 
shall lead to rejection of candidature. 
 
(14) Combination of optional subjects once chosen before closing date for 
submission of online application or corrected in hard copy of online application shall be 
treated as final and no request for change in subjects shall be allowed thereafter.   
 
(15) A candidate who misses any compulsory or optional subject of written 
examination for medical or any other reasons shall neither be allowed to appear in the 
remaining subjects nor separate examination for re-appearing in that missed paper shall be 
allowed.   
 
(16) No candidate shall be eligible to avail more than three chances of the 
competitive examination within prescribed age-limits.  Explanation.- A candidate shall be 
deemed to have attempted the examination and his chance stand consumed, if he actually 
appeared in any one or more papers of the competitive examination and even if he tendered 
blank answer book or sheet and even if rejected subsequently.   
 
(17) A candidate who conceals the number of previous attempts, shall be liable to 
prosecution leading to his disqualification under these rules.   

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -157 
 
 
 
(18) No candidate shall be admitted to the examination hall who does not hold 
original Computerized National Identity Card (CNIC) and admission certificate generated or 
downloaded from the Commission‗s website i.e. www.fpsc.gov.pk as admission certificate 
shall not be sent through post.    
 
(19) A candidate who arrives at examination hall or centre late, than the time 
mentioned in admission certificate and date sheet, he shall not be allowed to sit in the 
examination.  
 
(20) Candidates shall be admitted to the examination provisionally at their own 
risk subject to their being found eligible in all respects. On detailed scrutiny of the 
applications after the announcement of result of the written examination, if any candidate is 
found ineligible in any respect under these rules his candidature shall be cancelled and 
rejected regardless of the  fact whether  he has appeared in the examination or qualified 
therein. (21)  To avoid inconvenience, candidates shall ensure before appearing at the 
examination that they fulfill all requirements of the rules, relating to the examination.  
 
12. 
Qualifying marks in written examination.- (1) A candidate who fails to 
secure at least 40% marks in any of the compulsory subjects, 33% marks in any of the 
optional subjects and 50% marks in the aggregate shall be considered to have failed in 
written examination and shall not be eligible for medical examination, psychological 
assessment and viva voce.  
 
(2) 
Only the candidates declared qualified in the written examination and found 
eligible shall be called for subsequent medical examination, psychological assessment and 
viva voce.  
 
13. 
Medical examination.- (1) All candidates must be in good mental and bodily 
health and free from any physical defect likely to interfere with the discharge of their duties. 
The candidates who after such medical examination which the Commission and the 
appointing authority may prescribe are found not to satisfy these requirements shall not be 
appointed except special candidates as mentioned in sub-rule (2). 
 
(2) 
Special candidates in the categories of physically impaired, hearing or speech 
impaired and visually impaired shall be eligible to compete for competitive examination 
against all Occupational Groups and Services according to his choice.   
 
(3) 
Special candidates who are visually impaired or physically impaired shall be 
provided helper (writer), if they have been, by any Federal or a Provincial Council for 
Rehabilitation of Disabled Persons, declared permanently incapacitated with respect to 
writing and a disability certificate in that regard has been attached by them with application 
form and also requested for provision of helper in their application form.  The Commission 
shall arrange the helper from within the available staff of the Commission deputed at the 
examination centre. The role of the helper would merely be to reproduce in writing the words 
so uttered by the special candidate. No intellectual contribution by the helper shall be 
permissible. The educational level of the helper would be graduation, intermediate or 
matriculation as per availability at the examination centre. No request for helper of choice or 
venue of the examination shall be entertained. The special candidate alongwith helper shall 
remain within the examination hall till conclusion of the paper.  

Page -158                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
 
(4) 
Extra time of 15 minutes per hour shall only be allowed to visually impaired 
candidates. The other categories of special candidates shall not be allowed extra time.   
 
(5) 
The special candidate referred to in sub-rules (3) and (4) may attempt the 
question paper on computer, as the case may be, for which facility shall only be provided at 
the Commission‗s headquarters and its provincial offices, however, no TA/DA shall be 
admissible. Such computer literate candidates shall fill the relevant entries in the online 
application form, else they shall not be allowed to attempt the paper on computer.  
 
(6) 
No application or medical certificate regarding claim for disability or request 
for provision of helper or computer on medical grounds or sudden accident, shall be accepted 
after the closing date, except where the claim has been made in the application form before 
the closing date and certificate of disability as aforesaid attached as an evidence.  
 
(7) 
Candidates who qualify the written examination shall be medically examined 
by the medical board constituted for the purpose. If any candidate remains absent twice in his 
medical examination, his candidature shall automatically stand rejected and no appeal in this 
regard shall be entertained and his chance shall be considered as consumed.  
 
(8) 
In order to prevent disappointment, candidates may get themselves 
examined by a Government‗s medical officer of the standing of a civil surgeon before 
applying for admission to the examination, however, they shall abide by the instructions 
set out in Annex-A.  
 
14. 
Psychological assessment.- (1) All candidates called for viva voce shall be 
required to undergo psychological assessment, comprising written tests and group tasks, 
designed to assess abilities, attitude and personality characteristics of the candidates with 
special regard to their aptitude for the civil services. Separate marks are not awarded for the 
psychological assessment. However, 300 marks assigned to viva voce also reflect the 
performance on psychological assessment. Candidates must bring their CNIC and two recent 
photographs when summoned for psychological assessment. If a candidate remains absent in 
the psychological assessment, he shall not be allowed to appear for viva voce.  
 
15. 
Viva voce.-  (1) A candidate who is declared qualified in written examination 
shall be interviewed by a board who shall have before them a record of his career, both 
academic and extramural and he shall be asked questions on matters of general interest. The 
object of the interview is to assess his suitability for the services for which he is entered and 
in framing their assessment the board shall attach particular importance to the moral and 
ethical qualities of the candidates, his intelligence and alertness of mind, his vigour and 
strength of character and his potential qualities of leadership. The board shall take into 
consideration his extramural activities such as sports, debates, hobbies, etc., and their effect 
on his physique and character, in assessing his merit. 
 
(2) 
All candidates are expected to have basic knowledge regarding Islam and 
Pakistan. Questions may be asked in the viva voce on these subjects. Persons securing less 
than pass marks in these subjects shall not be considered for appointment, irrespective of 
their proficiency in other fields. However, the non-Muslim candidates shall not be asked any 
question regarding Islam. 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -159 
 
 
 
(3) 
Viva voce shall be of 300 marks. A candidate who fails to secure at least 100 
marks in viva voce shall be considered to have failed and shall not be eligible for 
appointment.   
 
(4) 
The result of viva voce shall be intimated to all candidates in due course of 
time.  
 
16 
General provisions regarding competitive examination.- (1)  A candidate 
must satisfy the Commission that he is suitable in all respects for employment under the 
Government.  
 
(2) 
The candidates who pass the written examination shall be intimated 
individually as well as through website but the candidates who fail in written examination 
shall not be informed individually, they may download detailed marks sheet from website.  
 
(3) 
Decision of the Commission as to the eligibility or otherwise of a candidate 
for admission to the examination shall, subject to the provisions of the Ordinance and rules 
made there under, be final.  
 
(4) 
A candidate who knowingly furnishes particulars which are false or 
suppresses material information or attempts to influence the Commission or officers or 
members of the staff of the Commission or tries to obtain support for his candidature by 
improper means or deliberately submits forged certificates or tampers with the entries in his 
age, educational and other certificates or misbehaves in the examination hall or uses unfair 
means including possession of cellular phone or other electronic device for use or attempted 
use for copying or is found guilty of misconduct during examination or medical or viva voce 
tests and uses filthy and unethical language in the answer book during written examination, 
shall be liable to disqualification for this and subsequent examinations or selections held by 
the Commission including debarring him from employment under the Federal Government 
and shall, however,  not absolve him from prosecution for a criminal offence if any in 
accordance with the law in force.  
 
(5) 
 If during the conduct of examination at an examination centre or hall, any 
candidate is found in possession of cellular phone or likewise devices, he shall be 
disqualified for the instant examination.  
 
(6) 
The result of any candidate whose candidature is rejected on any ground shall 
not be declared, irrespective whether he failed or passed the examination.  
 
(7) 
A candidate who even after his appointment is found to have knowingly 
furnished particulars which are false or to have suppressed material information shall be 
liable to dismissal from government service.  
 
(8) 
Certificates of age and educational qualifications in which any entry is 
overwritten, altered, erased, mutilated or tampered with in any way or the genuineness  of 
which is otherwise doubted shall be liable to be impounded till such time as the Commission 
considers it necessary.  
 
(9) 
All communication to the Commission should be addressed to the Secretary 
thereof by each candidate separately quoting his roll number and CNIC number. If roll 
number has not yet been allotted, serial number of the application may be quoted. Candidates 

Page -160                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
must make their own arrangements for communications addressed to them at the addresses 
stated in their applications to be redirected to their new addresses, when necessary. However, 
any change of address should be communicated at once to the Secretary of the Commission. 
Candidates should not write their postal addresses care of post box number etc. as postal 
authorities do not accept registered letters at such address.  
 
(10) As provided in Article 260 (3)(b) of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic 
of Pakistan, non-Muslim means a person who is not Muslim and includes a person belonging 
to the Christian, Hindu, Sikh, Budhist or Parci community, a person of the Quadiani group or 
the Lahori group (who call themselves ―Ahmadis‖ or by any other name), or a Bahai and a 
person belonging to any of the scheduled castes. Only those candidates shall be considered 
for vacancies reserved for non-Muslims whose application forms for the competitive 
examination are accompanied by certificate to this effect issued by the Deputy 
Commissioner or District Magistrate. No such certificate shall be accepted at any later stage. 
 
(11) Subject to the maximum three chances under these rules, applications of 
Government servants shall be governed by the Government Servants (Application for 
Services and Posts) Rules, 1966. 
 
(12) Government servants who fulfill conditions laid down in these rules shall be 
eligible for admission to the examination if permitted by the competent authority in their 
departments or offices. However, an advance copy of the application may be submitted 
before the closing date to avoid rejection. Candidates who join Government service after 
submitting their applications for admission to the examination shall submit the departmental 
permission certificate immediately thereafter.  
 
(13) Armed forces‘ candidates should route their applications through proper 
channel. Applications not routed through proper channel shall be rejected. Released or 
retired personnel should produce a clearance certificate from Military Secretary Branch for 
employment in civil services of Pakistan.  However, an advance copy of the application may 
be submitted before the closing date to avoid rejection.  
 
(14) A candidate who after submitting such departmental permission, joins Civil 
Services Academy or is transferred to another department, should obtain the permission of 
that department and submit it to the Commission as soon as possible.  
 
(15) A candidate who has left Government service should submit with his 
application an attested copy of his discharge or service certificate. A candidate who has been 
dismissed from Government or semi Government service shall not be eligible for admission 
to the examination.   
 
(16) If marks of a candidate are less than 40% in any of the compulsory subjects, 
less than 33% marks in any of the optional subjects and less than 100 marks out of 300 in 
viva voce, these shall not be counted and credited in the total marks.  
 
(17) The marking of answers shall be in order of consecutive answers and over 
attempted question shall not be evaluated and credited.  

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -161 
 
 
 
(18) Writing on question paper shall be considered as cheating and delinquent 
candidate shall be prosecuted under these rules. 
 
(19) If any candidate writes his roll number, except  in  the space provided for this 
purpose on the cover of the answer book, or  writes  his  name  or  makes  any  distinguishing  
mark  at  any place  in  his  answer  book  or  additional  answer book he shall be awarded 
zero marks in that paper, besides any other punishment which the Commission may decide 
to award.   
 
(20) A candidate who rips the pages or does not cross out empty pages of answer 
book or additional answer book or does not hand over his answer books or additional answer 
book to the supervisory staff, he shall be proceeded against for disciplinary action under 
these rules as the Commission may deem appropriate.  
 
(21) A candidate who has received and read the question paper shall not be 
allowed to leave his seat or examination hall without marking his attendance and until half 
the time is over. However, the candidate will not be allowed to take question paper with him 
until conclusion of the examination in that paper.    
 
(22) Use of calculators shall only be allowed in applied mathematics, pure 
mathematics, accountancy, statistics, business administration, physics and chemistry. Use of 
calculator shall not be allowed in the paper of general science and ability.    
 
(23) Paper containing multiple choice questions (MCQs) shall be attempted on 
optical mark reader (OMR) sheet provided separately for the purpose. Both MCQs paper and 
OMR sheet shall be collected back after the allotted time. The number of MCQs in each 
paper may be attempted in the same sequence at the space reserved on OMR sheet. Any 
answer given beyond the reserved space or not corresponding with question number of MCQ 
paper shall not be marked or taken into account.  
 
(24) The question papers in Urdu or other Pakistani regional languages (Punjabi, 
Sindhi, Pushto and Balochi), Persian and Arabic should be answered in the respective 
languages. However, question relating with translation from respective language into English 
or vice versa, may be answered as directed in the question paper.    
 
(25) The question paper in Islamic studies or comparative study of major religions 
is to be answered in English or Urdu only.   
 
(26) The non-Muslim candidates shall have the option either to take Islamic 
studies or comparative study of major religions.   
 
(27) Candidates must use blue or black ink only in their answer books otherwise 
zero marks may be awarded. 
 
(28) Answer books in all subjects of examination are confidential documents and 
cannot, therefore, be permitted to be seen by candidates or their representatives nor re-
examination of answer books and scripts shall be allowed under any circumstances. A 
candidate desirous of getting his marks, awarded by the examiners, re-counted may submit 
his request for the purpose, within one month from the date of issue of result card or marks 
sheet alongwith a treasury challan of five hundred Rupees per paper as fee for re-counting of 
marks only. Thereafter, no such request shall be entertained. 

Page -162                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
 
(29) Re-evaluation of marks awarded by the viva voce board shall not be allowed 
under any circumstances.  
 
(30)  Grace marks shall not be allowed.  
 
(31) Answer books of candidates shall be retained in the office of the Commission 
for one year only and thereafter destroyed. Any query relating to answer books should be 
made within the specified period, thereafter, no request in this regard shall be entertained. 
 
(32) No claim for refund of any fee shall be entertained nor can the fees paid be 
held in reserve for another examination or selection.  
 
(33) If a candidate who appeared in previous competitive examination, wishes to 
apply in the next competitive examination, he must submit an application by the prescribed 
date without waiting for the result of the previous competitive examination. If subsequently 
it is not necessary for him to appear in the next examination, his examination fee shall not be 
refunded. 
 
(34) The Commission reserves the right to change the schedule of the examination 
as well as to cancel any paper or papers or the entire competitive examination without 
assigning any reason.   
 
17. 
Representation and review petition.-  (1)  A candidate aggrieved by any 
decision of the Commission shall be entitled to make a representation or, as the case may be, 
a review petition in accordance with the provisions of the Ordinance and the rules made 
thereunder and no such representation or review petition shall be entertained unless 
accompanied with an original treasury receipt evidencing payment of fee of five hundred 
Rupees or such other fee as the Commission may determine from time to time.   
 
18. 
Determination of final merit and announcement of result.-  (1) The 
candidates who qualify in written examination and viva voce, their final merit shall be 
determined by adding marks obtained in the written examination and viva voce.  
 
(2) 
When total marks of written examination and viva voce of more than one 
candidate are equal, the one who gets more marks in viva voce shall be treated as higher in 
merit. If marks in viva voce are also equal, the one who gets more marks in compulsory 
subjects shall be treated as higher in merit. If marks in compulsory subjects are also equal the 
one who is older in age shall be treated as higher in merit.  
 
(3) 
No authority, accept the Commission shall be authorized to announce the 
result.  
 
19. Vacancies.-  Actual number of vacancies in BS-17 to be filled on the results of 
competitive examination shall be announced with the approval of the Establishment 
Division.  
 
20. Appointments.- (1)  Subject to Rule  10 (1), candidates securing the highest 
places on the combined results of the written examination, psychological assessment and 
viva voce and eligible for appointment shall be recommended by the Commission in order of 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -163 
 
 
merit up to the number of vacancies available. However, appointments shall be made by the 
respective appointing authorities. No candidate shall be considered for appointment to any of 
the Occupational Groups and Services for which he has been declared not suitable by the 
Commission at the time of viva voce.  
 
(2) 
Success in the examination confers no right to appointment. Appointments 
shall be made only after the appointing authority is satisfied, after such enquiry as may be 
necessary, that the candidate is suitable in all respects for appointment to the public service 
and subject to the availability of vacancies.  
 
(3) 
Candidates shall be considered for those Occupational Groups and Services 
only which they indicate in the application form. No candidate shall be considered for the 
Occupational Groups and Services which he will not mention in the form. Candidates 
shall be given a chance to revise their choice of Occupational Groups and Services at the 
time of the viva voce. Preferences so revised at the time of viva-voce shall be treated as 
final and no subsequent change shall be allowed under any circumstances. Candidates 
may opt for an Occupational Group and Service irrespective of the fact whether there is a 
vacancy therein or not.  
 
(4) 
The Commission reserves the right to allocate a candidate against any 
Occupational Group and Service irrespective of his preferences, in the public interest and 
decision of the Commission in this respect shall be final.  
 
21. 
Unfilled vacancies and waiting merit list.-  (1)   Once the process of 
allocation has been accomplished, the vacancies remained unfilled due to non-availability of 
qualified candidates shall be carried over to next competitive examination in accordance with 
the quota policy as may be prescribed by the Federal Government.  
 
(2) 
The Commission shall maintain the waiting merit list till commencement of 
Common Training Programme (CTP). Therefore, if any nominee of the Commission does 
not join and intimation in this regard reaches to the Commission through Establishment 
Division prior to commencement of CTP, the Commission shall nominate the next candidate 
on merit against an Occupational Group or Service according to his merit position, preferred 
choice and in accordance with the quota policy as may be prescribed by the Federal 
Government. 
 
(3) 
The vacancies of non-joiner, reported to the Commission after 
commencement of CTP shall be carried over to next competitive examination.   
 
(4) 
Once the process of allocation or re-allocation according to time lines given 
in these rules is over, the waiting merit list shall no longer be valid and the process of that 
competitive examination shall stand completed and closed.   
 
 
 
 

Page -164                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 [see rules 2(c) and 11(12)] 
SUBJECTS FOR WRITTEN EXAMINATION (1200 MARKS) 
1. 
The examination will include the following subjects and each subject will carry the 
marks shown against it.   
2. 
There will be two papers of 100 marks each of the subjects which carry 200 marks. In 
other subjects there will be one paper. Each paper will be of 3 hours duration.  
3. 
The candidates should expect some objective type questions (MCQs) in compulsory 
and optional papers except in the papers of essay, applied mathematics and pure 
mathematics.   
4. 
A Guideline of the syllabus of the subjects in alphabetical order is given in Annex B 
to these rules. 
5. 
The three papers of general knowledge (GK-I, GK-II and GK-III) are to be passed 
collectively by scoring 120 marks out of 300. 
6. 
Compulsory subjects (600marks) are— 
 (1) 
Essay 
100 
(2) 
English (Precis and Composition) 
100 
(3) 
General Knowledge:— 
(General Science (MCQs=20 marks, subjective= 40 marks) 
Ability: subjective=40 marks 
300 
(4) 
Islamic Studies or Comparative Study of Major Religions (for 
non-Muslim)  
100 
 
Total 
600 
 
Note:— MCQs are to be attempted on computerized OMR Answer Sheet, whereas 
subjective questions are to be attempted on Answer Book. 
7. 
Optional subjects (600 marks) 
The minimum standard of optional subjects will be that of an honour‘s degree of a university 
in Pakistan. The candidates are required to select optional subjects carrying a total of 600 
marks from the following groups as per rules given in column-1 below:— 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -165 
 
 
Rules 
Code 
No. 
Subject 
Marks 
Group-I 
 (One subject carrying 200 marks from code No. 
1115 can be opted)   
11 
Accountancy & Auditing 
200 
12 
Economics 
200 
13 
Computer Science 
200 
14 
Political Science 
200 
15 
International Relations 
200 
Group-II  
(One subject carrying 200 marks from code 16-17 
OR two subjects carrying 100 marks each from 
code 18-21 can be opted)   
16 
Physics 
200 
17 
Chemistry 
200 
18 
Applied Mathematics 
100 
19 
Pure Mathematics  
100 
20 
Statistics 
100 
21 
Geology 
100 
Group-III  
(One subject carrying 100 marks from code 22-25 
can be opted)   
22 
Business Administration 
100 
23 
Public Administration  
100 
24 
Government & Public Polices  
100 
25 
Town Planning & Urban 
Management 
100 
Group-IV  
(One subject carrying 100 marks from code 26-30 
can be opted)   
26 
History of Pakistan & India 
100 
27 
Islamic History & Culture 
100 
28 
British History 
100 
29 
European History 
100 
30 
History of USA 
100 
Group-V  
(One subject carrying 100 marks from code 31-37 
can be opted)   
31 
Gender Studies 
100 
32 
Environmental Sciences 
100 
33 
Agriculture & Forestry 
100 
34 
Botany 
100 
35 
Zoology 
100 
36 
English Literature 
100 
37 
Urdu Literature 
100 
Group-VI  
(One subject carrying 100 marks from code 38-44 
can be opted) 
38 
Law 
100 
39 
Constitutional Law 
100 
40 
International Law 
100 
41 
Muslim Law & Jurisprudence 
100 
42 
Mercantile Law 
100 
43 
Criminology 
100 
44 
Philosophy 
100 
Group-VII  
(One subject carrying 100 marks from code 45-55 
can be opted)   
45 
Journalism & Mass 
Communication 
100 
46 
Psychology 
100 
47 
Geography 
100 
48 
Sociology 
100 
49 
Anthropology 
100 
50 
Punjabi 
100 
51 
Sindhi 
100 
52 
Pashto 
100 
53 
Balochi 
100 
54 
Persian 
100 
55 
Arabic 
100 
 
 
 

Page -166                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
APPENDIX-II                   
[see rules 2(c), 11(10), 16(28), 17] 
COMPETITIVE EXAMINATION (CSS) 
RATE OF FEES 
1 . 
The following fees must be paid by the candidates:—  
 
(A)  To the Federal Public Service Commission:—        
 
 
(i)   
Rs.2200 for written competitive examination (Application fee)   
 
 
(ii)  
Rs.500 for each representation or review petition which a candidate 
wants to submit against any decision of the Commission.   
 
 
(iii)    
Rs.500 per paper as fee for re-counting of marks.        
 
 
Note.-  The procedure for payment of fee is as under: - 
 
 
(a)  
The amount should be deposited in the National Bank of Pakistan, or in 
the nearest Government Treasury or in State Bank of Pakistan under the 
Head of account ―C02101 Organs of State – Exam Fee (FPSC 
Receipts)‖. Cash, postal orders, bank drafts and cheques will not be 
accepted by the Federal Public Service Commission;  
 
 
(b)  
The name of the bank/treasury office at which the fee has been 
deposited should be clearly entered in the treasury receipt. The treasury 
receipt should be on the form prescribed for the Federal Government 
transactions and should be obtained from the treasury at which the fee is 
deposited; and   
 
 
(c)  
Candidates outside Pakistan may submit their applications without 
paying the prescribed examination fee. They must, however, arrange to 
pay the fees and send the receipt before the date of the examination. 
 
(B) To the Medical Board:— 
 
  
(i)   
Rs.100 to be deposited by all the candidates in the Government 
Treasury or State Bank of  Pakistan under Head of Accounts   ―C—
02839-Health Fee for Medical Examination.‖ The  original copy of the 
Treasury Challan should be handed over  to  the  President  of  the   
Central  Medical  Board  at  the time  of  Medical  Examination; 
 
  
(ii)  
Rs. 1400  before  examination  by  a  Medical  Board  in  the case  of  
candidates  who  qualify  in  the  written  examination. Payment of this 
fee will be required to be made in cash to the Medical Board concerned 
at the time of physical examination of the candidates. Candidates will 
present their National Identity Cards & Admission Certificates to the 
Medical Authorities concerned; and 
 
  
(iii)  
A Candidate who is medically deferred will have to make the full 
payment again to the Medical Board at the time of re-examination. 
 
2. 
Candidates must see the rules and must decide definitely before depositing 
the fee in the Treasury or Bank that they are eligible in all respects to apply for the 
examination. Fee once deposited in the Treasury or Bank will not be  refunded nor  will it  be  
held  in  reserve  for  any  other examination  or  selection  under  any  circumstances. 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -167 
 
 
Annex A   
[see rules 2(b) and 13(8)]. 
FEDERAL PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION INSTRUCTIONS FOR PHYSICAL 
EXAMINATION OF THE COMPETITIVE EXAMINATION 
 
1. 
These instructions are published for the convenience of candidates enabling them to 
ascertain the probability of their coming up to the required physical standards. 
However, Government of Pakistan reserve to themselves an absolute discretion to 
reject as unfit any candidate whom they may consider, on the report of the Medical 
Board, to be physically disqualified for the Services and that their discretion is in no 
respect limited by these regulations. 
2. 
If any change is made in these instructions including standards of physical fitness, 
an announcement will be made accordingly.  
3. 
Special candidates in the categories of physically impaired, hearing or speech 
impaired and visually impaired will be considered eligible to compete for all 
Occupational Groups and Services.    
4. 
For  appointment  a  candidate  must  be  in  good  mental  and  bodily  health  and  
free  from  any physical defect likely to interfere with the efficient performance of 
the duties of his appointment. Candidates whose height is less than 1524 
millimeters will not be considered physically fit for appointment to any of the BS 
17 post under the Federal Government. In the case of female candidates, this 
standard will be reduced to 1473 millimeters for posts which are completely 
sedentary provided the weight of such candidates is not less than 43.5 kilograms 
except special candidates.   
5. 
(a) 
In the matter of the correlation of age, height and chest-girth of 
 
candidates, it is left to the Medical Board to use whatever correlation 
 
figures are considered most suitable as a guide in the examination of 
 
the candidates except for the Police.    
(b) 
For the Police, the correlation of age, height and chest-girth will not 
 
be less than that given in the following Table:— 
 
PHYSICAL EQUIVALENTS 
Height Without Shoes 
Millimeters 
Chest 
Breath when full 
Expanded 
Millimeters 
Range of expansion 
not less than 
Millimeters 
1626 and under 1651 ……………..……... 
851 
51 
1651 and under 1727 ……………………. 
864 
51 
1727 and under 1778 …………………… 
876 
51 
1778 and under 1829 ……………………. 
890 
51 
1829 and upwards ……………….……….. 
902 
51 
 
6. 
The candidate‗s height will be measured as follows:— 
 
He will remove his shoes and be placed against the standard with his feet 
together and the weight thrown on the heels and not on the toes or outer sides of the 

Page -168                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
feet. He will stand erect without rigidity and with the heels, calves, buttocks and 
shoulders touching the standard, the chin will be depressed to bring the vertex of 
the head level under the horizontal bar and the height will be recorded in 
millimeters. 
7. 
The candidate‗s chest will be measured as follows:—  
He will be made to stand erect with his feet together and to raise his arms over his 
head. The tape will be so adjusted round the chest that its upper edge touches the 
interior angles of the shoulder blades behind and lies in the same horizontal plane 
when the tape is taken round the chest. The arms will then be lowered to hang 
loosely by the side and care will be taken that the shoulders are not thrown upward 
or backwards so as to displace the tape. The candidate will then be directed to take 
a deep aspiration several times and the maximum expansion of the chest will be 
carefully noted and the minimum and maximum will then be recorded in 
millimeters 838—890, 864—927, etc. In recording the measurements fractions of 
less than 13 millimeters should not be noted.  
8. 
The candidate will also be weighed and his weight recorded in kilograms. Fractions 
of a kilogram should not be noted.  
9. 
The candidate‗s eye sight except special candidates i.e. visually impaired will be 
tested in accordance with the following rules. Result of each test will be recorded:—  
 
(i) General—The  candidate‗s eyes will be submitted to a general examination 
directed to the detection of any disease of abnormality. The candidate will be 
rejected if he suffers from any squint or morbid conditions of eyes, eye lids or 
contiguous structures, or such a   sort as to render, or to be likely at a future 
date to render him/her unfit for service.  
 
(ii)  Visual Acuity.— The examination for determining the acuteness of vision 
includes two tests—one for distant, the other for near vision. Each eye will be 
examined separately.   
I. POLICE 
 
10. 
The Army test types will be used for the test for distant vision without glasses at a 
distance of 6096 millimeters and for the test for near vision, without glasses, at any distance 
selected by the candidate.  
 
11. 
No candidate will be considered fit for the service whose Visual Acuity falls below 
the following standards:—    
Standard I 
Right eye                                                                                    
              Left eye  
 
Distant Vision V. 6/6   ………………………………………………………..V. 6/6  
Near Vision––0.6……………………………………………………….…Reads 0.6    
 
Standard II 
 
Better eye                                                                                
 
          Worse eye  
 
Distant Vision, V. 6/6   …………………… 
V, without glasses, not below 6/60 and  
 
 
after correction with glasses not below  
 
 
6/24.   

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -169 
 
 
Near Vision––0.6………………………..…  
Reads 1.  
Better eye                                                               Worse eye  
Distant vision–V, without glasses:–not below 
V, without glasses, not below 6/60 
6/60 and after correction with glasses— not 
and 
after 
correction 
with 
glasses–  
below 6/6. 
below 6/24.  
Near Vision—Reads 0.8 
Reads1. 
 
12. 
No relaxation of the standards of vision will be allowed. (a) Each eye will be 
examined separately and the lids must be kept wide open during the test.  
 
II. RAILWAYS 
 
13. 
No candidate will be accepted whose Visual Acuity falls below the following 
standards:—   
 
  
 
Better eye 
 
Worse eye  
 
Distant vision without glasses  
6/12 
 
6/19 
Corrected with glasses  
6/6  
 
6/9 
Near vision with or without glasses  
0.6  
 
0.6    
 
Colour perception, night blindness and field vision:   
14. 
The candidates will be examined, with the apparatus and according to the methods 
prescribed by the Railway Board‗s Standing Advisory Committee of Medical Officers. Any 
defect of colour perception or in regard to field vision will be a cause for rejection of the 
candidate. The candidate under the condition of ordinary test for Visual Acuity having 6/6 
vision with both eyes open with or without glasses, will be rejected, if, under the conditions 
of the Night Blindness Test his/her vision with both eyes open, with or without glasses; falls 
below 6/24.    
 
III. OTHERS (EXCEPT SPECIAL CANDIDATE i.e. VISUALLY IMPAIRED) 
 
15. 
Snellen‗s test types will be used for the test for distant vision, without glasses at a 
distance of 6096 millimeters, and for the test for near vision, without glasses, at any distance 
selected by the candidate. 
 
16. 
No candidate will be accepted whose Visual Acuity falls below the following 
standard:— 
 
Better eye  
Worse eye  
Distant vision without glasses 
*6/24 *6/24  
Corrected with glasses 
6/6 6/12  
Near vision with or without glasses 
0.8 1   
* Temporarily lowered to 6/60 

Page -170                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
17. 
Colour perception, night blindness and field of vision:— 
 
(a) 
Each eye will be examined separately and the lids must be kept wide open 
during   the test.  
 
(b)  
Inability to distinguish the principal colours will not be regarded as a cause 
for rejection but the fact will be noted in the proceedings and the candidates 
will be informed. 
 
 (c) 
Each eye must have full field of vision as tested by hand movements.  
18. 
The degree of acuteness of vision of all candidates for appointment will be entered 
in the proceedings in the manner:—   
V.P...................................................................with glasses...............................................Reads  
V.L...................................................................with glasses….............................................Reads 
19. 
In cases of serious abnormality the opinion of an ophthalmic specialist should be 
obtained.   
20. 
No candidate will be accepted for appointment if his/her vision does not come upto 
the requirements specified above without the use of contact glasses.(Av contact glass or lens 
is defined as a glass shell, the concavity of which is in contact with the globe of the eye, a 
layer of liquid being interposed between the lens and the cornea. The meaning of the word ― 
glasses‖ wherever used above is to be interpreted as not covering contact glasses.)   
21. 
The urine (passed in the presence of the examiner) should be examined and the 
result  recorded.   
22. 
Following additional points should be observed:—  
(a) 
that the candidate‗s hearing in each ear is good except special  candidates i.e. 
hearing/speech impaired and that there is no sign of  
disease of the ear; 
(b) 
that the candidate‗s speech is without impediment except special candidates 
i.e. hearing/speech impaired;  
(c) 
that the candidate‗s teeth  
are in good order and that he/she is  provided 
with dentures where necessary for effective mastication  
(well-filled teeth 
will be considered as sound). Candidates for the  Police Service of Pakistan 
must have 10 sound teeth in the upper jaw,  
functionally opposed to 10 
sound teeth in the lower jaw. Two of  these  teeth  in each jaw must be 
molars. Well-filled teeth will be considered as sound;  
(d) 
that the candidate‗s chest is well-formed and his/her chest expansion 
sufficient; and that his/her heart and lungs are sound ;   
(e) 
that there is no evidence of any abdominal disease ;   
(f) 
that the candidate is not ruptured ;   
(g) 
that the candidate does not suffer from hydrocel, a severe degree of 
varicocele, varicose veins or polyps. A candidate for the Police Service of 
Pakistan who has been successfully operated on will be accepted ;  
(h) 
that the candidate‗s limb, hands and feet except special candidates i.e. 
physically impaired are well formed and developed and that there is 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -171 
 
 
  no shortening of any limbs and that there is free and perfect motion of 
 
all joints;  
(i) 
that the candidate does not suffer from any inveterate skin disease ; 
(j) 
that there is no congenital malformation or defect ;  
(k) 
that the candidate does not bear traces of acute or chronic disease  pointing 
to an impaired constitution ;  
(l) 
that the candidate bears marks of efficient vaccination ; or in the case of the 
Police Service of Pakistan he has been vaccinated (twice unsuccessfully) 
within the last five years.  (In support of this the candidates will be required 
to produce certificate signed by a Medical Officer); and  
(m) that the candidate is free from communicable disease.    
23. 
When any defect is found it must be noted in the certificate and the medical 
examiner should state his opinion whether or not it is likely to interfere with the efficient 
performance of the duties which will be required of the candidate if the condition is 
remediable by operation it should be so stated.   
24. 
If a candidate is declared medically unfit by the Central Medical Board, he/she will 
be informed by the Federal Public Service Commission that he/she has been declared 
medically unfit. The candidate will also be informed of the particular defect or defects for 
which he/she has been declared medically unfit. The candidate may prefer an appeal  against  
the  decision  of  the  Central  Medical  Board  to  the  Federal  Public  Service  Commission,  
Islamabad, within 14 days of the receipt of the information. The appeal must be supported by 
two certificates from the doctors of standing stating inter alia that:—  
 
(a) 
They are in full knowledge of the facts that the candidate has been 
 
  
examined by the Central Medical Board and declared unfit; and  
 
(b) 
That  they  have  read  the  Rules  and  Regulations  for  physical  fitness 
 
 
required  of  the  candidates  for  the Competitive Examination.  
25. 
Commission, however, reserve the right to deal with the appeal as they deem fit and 
do not bind themselves to constitute a second Medical Board for the medical examination of 
the candidate concerned. No further appeal shall be entertained against the decision of the 
Appellate Board and the case shall be treated as closed.   
Note:  This issue with the approval of the Federal Government vide Cabinet decision in case 
No. 693/Rule-19/18, dated 23.11.2018.      
                                                       
                                                                                                                  Ramiz Ahmad                                                                    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     Director General 
 
 
 
 
 

Page -172                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
6.2 
Section Officer Promotional Examination Rules,2015 
S.R.O 418(I)/2015.— In exercises of the powers conferred by sub-rule (2) of Rule 
3 of the Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules,1973 and Section 
7(1)(b) (i0 and (ii0 of FPSC Ordinance, 1977 (XLV of 1977), the Chairman, FPSC in 
pursuance of Section 7-A of FPSC Ordinance,1977, and with the approval of the Federal 
Government has made, in supersession of all earlier Rules for Section Officers Promotional 
Examination, the Section Officers Promotional Examination Rules,2015 for regulating and 
conduct of said examination from time to time.  
1. 
(i) 
The Section Officers Promotional Examination shall be conducted by 
 
the Federal Public Service Commission for selection of Section 
 
Officers against the number of vacancies as advertised by the 
 
Commission as and when such requisition is received from the 
 
Establishment Division.  
 
(ii) 
The Section Officers Promotional Examination shall comprise 
 
of the following components:— 
 
 
(a) Written Examination 
 
 
(b) Psychological Assessment and 
 
 
(c) Viva Voce 
 
(iii) 
The Examination shall be held on the dates as advertised by the 
 
Commission. 
(iv) 
The Examination shall be held simultaneously at Islamabad, 
   
Rawalpindi, Karachi, Lahore, Peshawar and Quetta. 
(v) 
Place 
for 
Psychological 
Assessment 
and 
Viva 
Voce.–
 
Psychological Assessment and Viva Voce shall be held only at 
 
FPSC HQs, Islamabad or Provincial Headquarters depending upon 
 
the number of qualified candidates at the respective centres. 
(vi) 
The Commission reserves the right to finally decide and notify the 
   
places of Examinations/Psychological Assessment and Viva Voce. 
(vii) No request for change of centre shall normally be entertained. 
 
When a candidate, however, desires to change his/ her centre, from 
 
one indicated in his/ her Application Form for the Examination, he/ 
 
she should make a written request to this effect to the Secretary, 
 
FPSC, Islamabad and send it by registered post, as soon as possible 
 
but not later than 15 days prior to conduct of examination giving 
 
full  justification as to why he/ she desires to do so. Such request 
 
will be considered only on merit. 
 
2. 
Cut off date to determine eligibility.–The closing date for submission of 
applications as advertised by the Commission shall be the cut off date to determine the 
eligibility in terms of length of service and age of the candidate, etc. 
3. 
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA.–Following shall be the criteria to be 
eligible for applying/appearing in SOPE: 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -173 
 
 
 
(1) 
EDUCATION 
i) 
A candidate must hold at least a Second Class or Grade ―C‖ Bachelor‘s 
degree in any faculty from one of the Pakistani Universities or an 
equivalent degree or comparable educational qualifications of a foreign 
University recognized by Higher Education Commission, Islamabad. 
ii)     A candidate who has obtained a Third Division (or ‗D‘ grade) in 
 
 his/her Bachelor‘s degree will be eligible for the Examination in cases 
 
where he/she has obtained a higher Division in Master‘s Degree. 
iii)     The matter as to which foreign degree is comparable and equivalent to 
corresponding Pakistani degree shall be decided by HEC. Therefore, an 
equivalence certificate issued by HEC may be attached with application 
form. 
(2)     AGE-LIMITS 
A candidate for admission to the examination must have attained the minimum 
age of 30 years on the closing date for receipt of application as advertised by the 
Commission. 
(1) 
AGE-RELAXATION 
No age relaxation shall be allowed in any case. 
(4) 
DATE OF BIRTH 
The date of birth accepted by the Commission shall be that entered in the 
following documents, however the decision as to which certificate shall be 
accepted rests with the Commission:- 
i) 
Matriculation Certificate; 
ii) 
Secondary or Higher Secondary School Leaving Certificate; 
iii) 
Certificate of birth from the Principal/Headmaster of the School from 
where a candidate has passed his/her GEC, ‗O‘ level or equivalent 
examination showing the date of birth in the School Admission Register; 
iv) 
In case of Christian candidates, Baptismal or birth registration certificate; 
v) 
Authenticated by service record. 
(5)     LENGTH OF SERVICE 
(i) 
Eight (08) years regular service in BS-11 to BS-16 in President‘s 
Secretariat, Prime Minister‘s Secretariat, Senate Secretariat, National 
Assembly Secretariat, Federal Secretariat, Attached Departments, 
Wafaqi Mohtasib‘s Secretariat, Federal Service Tribunal, Federal Public 
Service Commission, Intelligence Bureau and also the Civilian Employees 
of Pakistan Armed Forces Headquarters and their lower formations. 
(ii)     Length of service as at (i) above means regular service acquired before or 
after obtaining the required educational qualification as given at Rule-3 
(1) (i) and (ii) above. 

Page -174                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
(6)    INELIGIBILITY WITH RESPECT TO SERVICE 
The employees of the following offices/categories shall not be eligible to apply/ 
appear for SOPE. 
i) 
All Subordinate Offices such as Customs/Central Excise & Income 
 
Tax including field offices of the FBR.   
ii) 
Accountants General in the Provinces. 
iii) 
AJK Council. 
iv) 
Provincial Governments, Azad Jammu & Kashmir and Gilgit-Baltistan 
 
Governments. 
v) 
Election Commission of Pakistan 
vi)      Federal Shariat Court 
vii) 
Semi Government, Autonomous Bodies, Corporations and Regulatory 
Authorities. 
viii) Strategic Organizations such as PAEC, KRL, AWC and others. 
ix) 
The employees working below BS-11 and those who are placed in BS-17 
on regular basis. 
x) 
The employees mentioned at (i) to (viii) working on deputation basis in 
Federal Government. 
xi) 
Other departments which have not been declared as attached departments 
in terms of Schedule III of Rules of Business, 1973. 
4.     SUBMISSION OF APPLICATION AND ADMISSION TO THE 
EXAMINATION.—(1) All applications for Section Officers Promotional Examination 
must be submitted on line through FPSC website www.fpsc.gov.pk, on or before the 
closing date for receipt of applications as advertised by FPSC. 
(2) 
Print out of the duly filled Online Form (i.e. Hardcopy) may be obtained 
and after signing it, copies of all documents/certificates (as mentioned at sub rule-7) may 
be attached with it and furnished to FPSC so as to reach the FPSC (Headquarters) within 
10 days of the closing date. Preferably, the hardcopies may be dispatched or furnished 
before the closing date so that delay in transit may be avoided. Onus of proof of dispatch 
of hardcopy of online form and documents, before the closing date, shall solely lie on the 
candidate. 
(3) 
Candidates are cautioned that if an online application is received 
incomplete or wrongly filled in or its hardcopy not accompanied with any one of the 
documents mentioned at sub-rule (7), it will be rejected. 
(4) 
Hardcopy of the online application, if reached to FPSC after the stipulated 
period of 10 days from the closing date, it shall not be accepted and online form already 
submitted to FPSC shall stand rejected. 
(5) 
The hard copy of the online form shall have the same entries as made in 
the online form submitted to FPSC, and any variation shall cause rejection of 
candidature. 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -175 
 
 
(6)    No plea that hardcopy of online application form or any document 
attached with it has been lost or delayed in the post shall be entertained. 
(7)     The candidates must send the following documents with their duly signed 
Applications, else their applications shall be rejected:- 
(i)    Recent 4 photographs (attested on back side, mentioning name and 
 
father‘s name). 
(ii) 
Attested copy of Computerized National Identity Card. 
(iii) Attested copy of Matriculation Certificate showing date of birth. 
Provisional Certificate/Result Card/Marks Sheet is not acceptable. 
(iv) Attested copy of Intermediate Certificate. Provisional Certificate/Result 
Card/Marks Sheets is not acceptable. 
(v) 
Attested copy of Degree(s) alongwith Detailed Marks Sheets issued by the 
Controller of Examination. 
(vi) Attested copy of self Domicile Certificate. 
(vii) Copies of Notification(s)/ Office Order(s) of each appointment/promotion 
as claimed. 
(viii) Departmental Permission Certificate (DPC) as per Annex-A of 
Application Form, for proof of working in Ministry/ Division/ Attached 
Department in terms of Rules of Business, 1973. 
(ix) In case of civilian employees of Armed Forces Headquarters and their 
lower formations, attested copy of Office Order/Notification (mentioning 
detail of offices and lower formations) issued by the of Defence Division, 
as a proof. 
5. 
NUMBER OF ATTEMPTS (1) A candidate may avail maximum three 
attempts of the examination after attaining the minimum age of 30 years on the closing 
date advertised by the Commission. 
(2)     The 1st attempt of examination shall be counted w.e.f. first Section 
Officers Promotional Examination held under these Rules. 
(3)     A candidate shall be deemed to have attempted the examination and his 
chance shall stand consumed, if he/she actually appeared in any one or more papers of the 
examination and even if he/she tendered blank Answer Book/Sheet and even if rejected 
subsequently. 
(4) 
A candidate who conceals the number of previous attempts, shall be 
prosecuted leading to his/her disqualification in accordance with Rule-17 of these Rules. 
6.   DISABLE CANDIDATES.—(1)   Disabled candidates viz visually 
impaired (Blind) and physically impaired shall be provided computer/helper (writer), if 
they have been declared permanently incapacitated with respect to writing by the 
Federal/Provincial Council for Rehabilitation of Disabled Persons, and a certificate in this 

Page -176                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
regard has been attached by them with application form and also requested for provision 
of computer/helper in their application form, the FPSC shall arrange the helper from 
within the available staff of FPSC deputed at the examination centre. The role of the 
helper would merely be to reproduce in writing the words so uttered by the disabled 
candidate. No intellectual contribution by the helper is permissible. The educational level 
of the helper shall be Graduate/Intermediate/ matriculate as per availability at the 
examination centre. No request for choicest helper or venue of the examination shall be 
entertained. The disabled candidate alongwith helper shall remain within the examination 
hall till conclusion of the paper. 
(2) 
Extra time of 15 minutes per hour shall only be allowed to visually 
impaired (Blind) candidates. The other categories of disabled candidates shall not be 
allowed any extra time. 
(3) 
A disabled candidate referred to in sub-rule (1) and (2) may attempt the 
question paper on computer for which facility shall only be provided at FPSC HQs and 
FPSC‘s Provincial Offices. However, no TA/DA shall be admissible. Such Computer 
literate candidates must fill the relevant entries in the online Application Form, else they 
shall not be allowed to attempt the paper on computer. 
7. 
WRITTEN EXAMINATION.—(1) The medium of the Examination 
shall be English. 
 
(2) 
The Examination shall be passed by a candidate as a whole and not in 
parts. 
(3) 
Subjects for the Section Officers Promotional Examination shall comprise 
of compulsory papers of 450 marks and optional papers of 200 marks as prescribed in 
Appendix-1. 
 
(4) 
Optional Subjects must be selected carefully. Candidates are cautioned 
that wrong selection of subjects shall lead to rejection under rule-4 (3) above and para (2) 
of Appendix-1. 
 
(5) 
Combination of optional subjects once chosen at the time of submission 
of online application shall not be allowed to change subsequently. Change of optional 
subjects in hard copy of online form shall also not be allowed. 
 
(6) 
For whatsoever reasons, a candidate who misses any compulsory or 
optional papers of written examination for medical or any other reasons shall not be 
allowed to appear in the remaining papers. 
 
(7) 
If a candidate misses a paper for any reason, separate examination in that 
paper shall not be arranged for him/her. 
8. 
ADMISSION TO EXAMINATION.—(1) No candidate shall be 
admitted to the examination hall who does not hold a certificate of admission issued by 
the Commission and Original CNIC. An admission certificate generated or down 
loaded from FPSC website shall be accepted. Intimation about examination centre and 
Roll No. may be down loaded from FPSC website, if not received through post. 
 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -177 
 
 
 
(2) 
A candidate who arrives at examination hall/centre late than the time 
mentioned in Admission Certificate & date sheet, he/she shall not be allowed to sit in the 
examination. 
 
9. 
EFFECT OF INELIGIBILITY.—(1) Candidates will be admitted to the 
examination provisionally at their own risk subject to their being found eligible in all 
respects. On detailed scrutiny of the applications after the announcement of result of the 
written part of the examination, if any candidate is found ineligible in any respect under 
these rules for the examination his/her candidature shall be cancelled/ rejected regardless 
of the fact whether he/she has appeared in the examination or qualified therein. 
 
 
(2) 
The result of any candidate, whose candidature is rejected on any ground, 
shall not be declared, irrespective whether he/she, failed/passed the examination 
 
Note: To avoid ―INCONVENIENCE‖, candidates are advised in their own 
interest to make sure before appearing at the examination that they fulfill all 
requirements of the rules, relating to the examination. 
 
10. 
QUALIFYING MARKS IN WRITTEN EXAMINATION.—(1)   A 
candidate who fails to secure at least 40% marks in any of the compulsory subject/paper 
and 40% marks in any of the optional subject/paper and 50% marks in the Aggregate 
shall be considered to have failed in written examination and shall not be eligible for 
Psychological Assessment and Viva Voce. 
 
(2) 
No grace marks shall be allowed. 
 
(3) 
Only those candidates who are declared qualified in written examination 
and found eligible in all respects shall be called for Psychological Assessment and Viva 
Voce. 
 
11. 
PSYCHOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT.—All candidates called for Viva 
Voce shall be required to undergo Psychological Assessment, comprising written tests 
and group tasks. Such tests are designed to assess abilities, attitude and personality 
characteristics of the candidates with special regard to their aptitude for the Civil 
Services. Separate marks are not awarded for the Psychological Assessment. However, 
200 marks assigned to Viva Voce also reflect the performance on Psychological 
Assessment. Candidates must bring their National Identity Cards and two copies of recent 
photographs when summoned for Psychological Assessment. If a candidate remains 
absent in the Psychological Assessment, he/she shall not be allowed to appear for Viva Voce. 
 
12. 
VIVA VOCE.—(1) There shall be a Viva Voce of 200 marks. 
 
 
(2) 
Each candidate who is declared qualified in written part of the 
examination shall be interviewed by a Board which shall have before them a record of 
his/her career, both academic and extramural. He/she shall be asked questions on matters 
of general interest. The object of the interview is to assess his/her suitability for the 
services for which he/she is entered and in framing their assessment, the Board shall 
attach particular importance to the moral and ethical qualities of the candidates, his/her 
intelligence and alertness of mind, his/her vigor and strength of character and his/her 

Page -178                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
potential qualities of leadership, knowledge and analytical abilities. The Board shall take 
into consideration his/her extramural activities such as sports, debates, hobbies, etc., and 
their effect on his/her physique and character, in assessing his/her merit. 
 
(3) 
All candidates are expected to have basic knowledge regarding Islam, 
Pakistan and Current Affairs. Questions may be asked in the Viva Voce on these subjects. 
Persons securing less than pass marks in these subjects shall not be considered for 
appointment to Government jobs, irrespective of their proficiency in other fields. 
However, the Non-Muslim candidates shall not be asked any question regarding Islam. 
 
(4) 
A candidate called for Viva Voce Test, shall be required to bring his/ her 
original documents, CNIC and Admission Certificate on the date he/ she appears for Viva 
Voce Test. These will be returned on the spot if found in order. Any document found to 
have been tampered with, shall be liable to be retained and the candidate, liable to be 
criminally prosecuted in addition to being permanently debarred from the Commission‘s 
Examinations and selections and from Employment under Government. 
 
(5) 
A candidate who fails to secure at least 50% marks in Viva Voce (i.e. 100 
marks) shall be considered to have failed and shall not be eligible for appointment. 
 
13. 
DETERMINATION OF FINAL MERIT & ANNOUNCEMENT OF 
RESULT.—(1) The candidates who qualify in written examination and Viva Voce, their 
final merit shall be determined by adding marks obtained in the written examination and 
viva voce. 
 
(2) 
When total marks (written examination + viva voce) of more than one 
candidate are equal, the one who gets more marks in viva voce shall be treated as higher 
in merit. If marks in viva voce are also equal, the one who gets more marks in 
compulsory subjects shall be treated as higher in merit. If marks in compulsory subjects 
shall be also equal, the one who is older in age shall be treated as higher in merit. 
 
(3) 
The candidates who pass the written examination shall be intimated 
individually as well as through website but the candidates who fail in written examination 
shall not be informed individually. They may download detail mark sheets from FPSC‘s 
website. 
 
(4) 
Only FPSC is authorized to announce the result of the examination. 
 
14. 
(1) The Government sometimes announces public holidays at a short 
notice. The FPSC examinations/ interviews shall not be affected by such announcements, 
unless a decision on postponement is conveyed to the candidates. 
 
(2) 
The Commission reserves the right to change the schedule of the 
Examination as well as to cancel any paper(s) or the Examination without assigning any 
reason. 
15. 
Appointment.—(1) The candidates securing highest places on the 
combined results of the Written Examination, Psychological Assessment and Viva Voce 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -179 
 
 
and eligible for appointment shall be recommended by the Commission in order of merit 
upto the number of advertised vacancies. 
 
(2) 
Success in the Examination confers no right to appointment, as the 
appointments are made by the Government in accordance with the Civil Servants 
(Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973 and fulfillment of the required 
formalities. 
 
16. 
Reserve Merit List/Alternate Nomination.— (1) Once the process of 
selection against advertised vacancies is completed, the Commission shall maintain the 
Reserve merit list till commencement of the Specialized Training Program (STP). 
 
(2) 
In case a recommended candidate tenders his unwillingness to join the 
Specialized Training Program (STP) to the Establishment Division and request of 
Establishment Division for alternate nomination reaches to the Commission before the 
commencement of STP, the Commission shall nominate the next candidate on merit from 
the reserve merit list against the vacancy. 
 
(3) 
The vacancies of a non-joiner, reported to the Commission after 
commencement of STP shall not be entertained and carried over to next examination. 
 
(4) 
On commencement of the STP, the reserve merit list shall no longer be 
valid and the process of Section Officers Promotional Examination shall stand completed 
and closed. 
 
17. 
Warning.—(1) A candidate who knowingly furnishes particulars which 
are false, or suppresses material information, or attempts to influence the Commission, or 
officers or members of the staff of the Commission, or tries to obtain support for his/her 
candidature by improper means, or deliberately submits forged certificates, or tampers 
with the entries in his/her age, educational and other certificates, or misbehaves in the 
examination hall or uses unfair means including use or attempted use of mobile phone or 
other electronic device for copying, or is found guilty of misconduct during Written 
Examination, Psychological Assessment and Viva Voce and uses filthy and unethical 
language in the Answer Book(s)during written examination, may be disqualified for this 
and/or subsequent examinations/selections held by the Commission and/or criminally 
prosecuted and debarred from future and/or removal from existing employment under 
Government. 
 
(2) 
If during the conduct of Examination at a centre/hall, any candidate is 
found in possession of mobile phone or likewise devices, he/she shall be prosecuted 
under the rule-17(1). 
 
(3) 
A candidate who, even after his/her appointment, is found to have 
knowingly furnished particulars which are false, or to have suppressed material 
information shall be liable to dismissal from Service. 
 
18. 
Departmental 
Permission 
Certificate.–Departmental 
Permission 
Certificate (DPC) as at Annex-A of the Application Form may be provided within 10 
days of the closing date. However, candidate shall submit an advance copy of application 
on prescribed form to FPSC on or before closing date to avoid rejection due to delay that 
may occur in processing of DPC by the Government channels. 

Page -180                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
 
19. 
Correspondence.– All correspondence may be addressed to Secretary, 
FPSC. Candidates should not write their postal addresses care of Post Box Number etc. as 
Postal Authorities do not accept registered letters for such an address. In all 
correspondence in connection with Applications, (before receiving Roll Numbers) full 
name of candidates, CNIC number, contact number and name of the post/examination 
applied for, should be mentioned. 
 
20. 
Change of address shall be reported to the FPSC immediately. 
 
21. 
Recounting.—Answer Books are secret documents and cannot, therefore, 
be permitted to be seen by the candidates or their representatives nor re-examination of 
Answer Books/Scripts shall be allowed under any circumstances. A candidate desirous of 
getting his/her marks, awarded by the examiners re-counted may submit his/her request, 
so as to reach FPSC within thirty days of the date of display on FPSC‘s website/issue of 
Result Card/Marks Sheet/ alongwith a Treasury Receipt of Rs.500/- per paper as fee for 
re-counting of marks only. No such request shall be entertained, thereafter. 
 
22.    REPRESENTATION AND REVIEW PETITION.—(1) A candidate 
aggrieved by any decision of the Federal Public Service Commission may, within thirty 
days of communication of decision, make a representation to the Commission and the 
Commission shall decide the representation within fifteen days after giving the candidate 
a reasonable opportunity of hearing. 
 
(2) 
A candidate aggrieved by the decision of the Commission made under 
sub rule (1) may, within fifteen days of communication of decision, submit a review 
petition to the Commission and the Commission shall decide the review petition within 
thirty days under intimation to the petitioner. The decision of the Commission on review 
petition shall be final. 
 
(3) 
Save as provided in ―Federal Public Service Commission Ordinance, 
1977‖, no order made or proceeding taken under ―FPSC ORDINANCE, 1977‖, or rules 
made hereunder, by the Commission shall be called in question in any court and no 
injunction shall be granted by any court in respect of any decision made or taken in 
pursuance of any power conferred by, or under, ―FPSC Ordinance, 1977‖. 
 
(4) 
Any candidate aggrieved by a decision of the Commission under sub-rule 
(2) may, within thirty days of the decision, prefer an appeal to the High Court. 
 
(5) 
Each representation and review petition duly signed shall be entertained 
only if accompanied with Original Treasury Receipt of Rs.500/- in each case. 
 
23.   SPECIALIZED TRAINING PROGRAM.— (1) The candidates 
recommended for appointment as Section Officer on probation shall be required to 
undergo Specialized Training Programme (STP) having 600 Marks. 
 
(2) 
The format and content of the Specialized Training Program shall be the 
same as prescribed for officers of Office Management Group. 
 
(3) 
Qualifying threshold in STP shall be 45 percent. 
 
24. 
FINAL PASSING OUT EXAMINATION.— (1) After successful 
completion of Specialized Training Programme (STP), the probationers shall have to 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -181 
 
 
appear in the Final Passing Out Examination (FPOE) of 1000 marks to be conducted by 
FPSC. 
 
(2) 
The subjects/ papers and distribution of marks for FPOE shall be the 
same as prescribed for officers of Office Management Group. 
 
(3) 
Qualifying threshold in each paper and in aggregate for FPOE shall be 
45%. 
 
25. 
INTER-SE-SENIORITY.—For the purpose of determining the Inter-Se-
Seniority of the SOPE qualified and nominated candidates the marks obtained by a 
qualified candidate in SOPE (Written Examination, Psychological Assessment and Viva 
Voce) held by the Commission shall be added to the marks obtained by him/her in the 
Specialized Training Program and the marks obtained in the Final Passing Out 
Examination in the first attempt. 
26. 
APPLICATION OF RULES.—The Occupational Groups and Services 
(Probation, Training and Seniority) Rules, 1990 and Occupational Groups and Services 
(Final Passing Out Examination) Rules, 2003 shall be applicable mutatis mutandis, to the 
probationers of SOPE. 
27. 
This issues with the concurrence of Establishment Division vide their 
letter No. 7/4/2014.T.V, dated 02-12-2014 and 22-4-2015 and FPSC as required vide 
Establishment Division‘s O.M No.1/2/78-DV, dated 27-8-1978. 
[No. F. 7/1/2014 (SOPE)-PPE.] 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
          DR. SYED HYDER ALI, 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
    SECRETARY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page -182                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
Appendix-I 
SUBJECTS FOR WRITTEN EXAMINATION FOR SECTION OFFICERS 
PROMOTIONAL EXAMINATION 
(1) 
Compulsory Papers 
Paper-I: Essay           (50 Marks time:2 Hours) 
Paper-III General Knowledge  
     100 Marks  
 
Time: 03 Hours 
(i) 
Every Day Science (20 Marks) 
(ii) Islamiat 
 
 
(20 Marks) 
(iii) Pakistan Affairs (30 Marks) 
(iv) Current Affairs (20 Marks) 
 
The Non-Muslim candidates have the option 
either to take/attempt Islamiat portion of 
Paper-III or otherwise the marks obtained by 
them in the portion of Pakistan Affairs shall 
be treated as out of 50 marks in lieu of both 
Islamiat and Pakistan Affairs.  
Part-II: English (Precis and Composition) 
(100 Marks 
 
Time: 03 Hours 
Precis 
 
 
= 
30 Marks 
Comprehension  
 
= 
30 Marks 
Grammar  
 
= 
40 Marks 
 
 
 
Paper-IV Specialized Paper for Office Management-I  
100 Marks  
 
Time: 03 Hours 
(i) 
Human Resource Management          (30 Marks) 
(ii) 
Basic Concepts of Quality Management  (20 Marks) 
(iii) Information Technology and Use of MS Office (20 Marks) 
(iv) General Financial Rules Vol.I and Vol.II, System 
 
of Financial Control and Budgeting, Role of Public 
 
Accounts Committee 
 
(30 Marks)  
  
 
 
Paper-V Specialized Paper for Office 
Management-II  
100 Marks  
 
Time: 03 Hours 
(i) 
Civil Servant Act,1973 and Rules made 
there under  (20 Marks) 
(ii) Federal Public Service Commission 
Ordinance 1977 and Rules made there 
under 
(20 Marks) 
(iii) Rules of Business,1973 (20 Marks) 
(iv) Secretariat Instructions and Office 
Procedures 
 
           (20 Marks) 
(v) Public Sector Companies (Corporate 
Governance) Rules 2013 
(vi) PPRA Ordinance and Rules 2004. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) 
Optional Subjects/Papers 
 
Candidates are required to select two optional subjects, carrying 100 marks 
each, one from each of the following Groups: 
 
(3) 
Detailed contents of syllabus is available at Annex-I. 
Code 
No. 
Group-I 
Each Subject carries 100 marks 
Opt only one subject from this 
box 
1 
Accountancy and Auditing 
2 
Basic Mathematics and Statistics 
3 
Business Administration 
4 
Computer Science 
5 
Development Economics 
6 
Economy of Pakistan 
7 
Public Administration 
Code 
No. 
Group-II 
Each Subject carries 100 marks Opt only 
one subject from this box 
8 
Constitutional Law including Constitution 
of Pakistan 
9 
English Literature 
10 
Geography 
11 
History of Pakistan and India 
12 
History of USA 
13 
International Relations 
14 
Political Science 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -183 
 
 
GUIDELINES OF THE SYLLABUS 
Syllabi: The Syllabi for compulsory and optional papers shall be as under: 
 
Paper-I: Essay: Candidates shall be required to write one or more essays in English from 
six topics. 
 
Paper-II: 
Grammar, Precis and Composition: 
 
(i) 
Precis: Candidates should have the ability to present a precis of a given 
passage which would be selected from current, economic, social, cultural 
affairs. 
(ii) 
Comprehension: Two unseen passages from current, social, economic, 
cultural, political or international affairs will be given with fixed reading 
time and multiple choice questions will be asked to be answered. 
(iii) 
Grammar, Vocabulary and Translation: The Candidates will be tested 
in correct usage of English Grammar including synonyms and antonyms, 
Vocabulary and Translation (English to Urdu and Urdu to English). 
 
 
Suggested Readings: 
 
English Idioms 
 
 
 
McMordie 
 
 
Practical English Usage   
 
Swan (OUP) 
 
A Practical English Grammar 
 
Thomson & Martinet 
 
A University English Grammar 
 
R. Quirk & S. Greenbaum 
Paper-III: General Knowledge: 
 
(i) 
Every day Science  
 
 
Nature of Science, Brief History of Sciences with special reference 
to contribution of Muslims in the evolution and development of 
science; 
 
Physical Sciences including Universe, Galaxy, Solar System, Sun, 
Earth and Minerals, Energy—sources and resources of energy, 
energy conservation; 
 
Biological Sciences including basis of life, a brief history of plant 
and animal kingdom.  
 
Global warming and climate change.  
  
 
Suggested Readings: 
 
Principles of Animal Biology 
 
Khan M. Rafiq 
 
Guide to Science   
 
 
Isaac Asimove 
 
Exploring Life Sciences 
 
 
Tuber, Kilburn, Howell 

Page -184                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
(ii) 
Islamiat: 
 
 
Islam—Its concept and meaning, Islamic concepts of Universe and 
Humanity, Man as Vicegerent of Allah, Main Characteristics of 
Islamic Ideology; 
 
Fundamental Beliefs and Practices of Islam: Tuheed (unity of 
Allah), Risalat (Finality of Prophethood), Akhrat (Day of 
Judgement), Slat, Soum (Fasting), Zakat, Hajj, Jehad; 
 
Sources of Shariah: The Qur‘an, Sunnah, Ijma (Consensus), Qiyas 
and Ijtejad (reasoning);  
 
Islamic Way of Life: (a) Social System in Islam (b) Morality in 
Islam (c) Islamic Political System (d) Islamic Economic System (e) 
Islam and other Civilization (f) Islam and Terrorism. 
 
 Suggested Readings: 
 
Islamic Nizam-e-Hayat 
  
 
Khurshid Ahmed  
Islam: Its meaning and Message 
 
Khurshid Ahmed 
 
Introduction to Islam 
 
 
Dr. Hamidullah 
Haqeeqat-i-Deen  
 
 
Moulana Ameen Islahi 
 
(iii) Pakistan Affairs: 
 
Ideology of Pakistan-Definition and historical aspects; 
 
Pakistan Movement and Political Developments Since 1947. 
 
Defense of Pakistan, Terrorism and Counter Terrorism.  
 
Education and Health System of Pakistan.  
 
Geography of Pakistan: Land, People, Natural Resources, 
Environment, Global Warming and Natural Disasters, Languages, 
Ethnicity in Pakistan, Rural and Urban Tensions.   
 
Agriculture and Industry.  
 
 Suggested Readings: 
 
Geography of Pakistan 
 
 
 
K.U.Kureshi 
The Making of Pakistan 
 
 
 
K.K.Aziz 
Ulema in Politics  
 
 
 
I.H. Qureshi 
Ideological Orientation of Pakistan  
 
Al-Mujahid Sharif 
Towards Pakistan 
 
 
 
Waheed-uz-Zaman 
(iv) Current Affairs 
 
Pakistan‘s relations with its neighbours: Afghanistan, Iran, China, 
and India; 
 
Pakistan‘s relations with Muslim World 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -185 
 
 
 
Pakistan‘s relations with the United States, Russia, United Kingdom 
and European Union 
 
Pakistan‘s relations with Central Asian, ASEAN and African 
Countries. 
 
Pakistan‘s role in Regional and International Organizations 
 
W.T.O and GSP Plus 
 
Issues in Pakistan Politics 
 
 Suggested Readings: 
 
Politics in Pakistan 
 
 
 
Khalid B. Sayeed 
Pakistan‘s Foreign Policy  
 
 
S.M. Burke 
Pakistan‘s Foreign Policy  
 
 
Shahid M. Amin 
Pakistan in 20th Century: A Political History  
Lawrence Ziring 
The Military and Politics in Pakistan 
 
Hasan Askari Rizvi 
The Security of South Asia  
 
 
Stephen P. Cohen 
Paper-IV: 
Specialized Paper for Office Management-I 
(i) 
Human Resource Management: 
 
 
Definition, Significance and Scope of Human Resource 
Management 
 
Organization— Types of Organization, Theory of Organization, 
Principles of Organization, Organization of the Federal and 
Provincial Governments, Public Sector Enterprises 
 
Approaches to Human Resource Management 
 
Personnel Administration—Tools of Personnel Management: 
Selection, Training, Promotion, Compensation, Discipline. 
 
Communication, Communication Channels and Principles of Public 
Relations  
 
Human Behaviour and Organizations. 
Suggested Readings: 
Human Resource Management  
 
 
H.T.Graham & Roger Bennett 
Management 
 
 
 
 
James A.F. Stoner, R.Edward 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Freeman, Daniel R.Gilbert Jr. 
(ii) 
Basis Concepts of Quality Management 
 
ISO-9000, 
ISO-13000, 
other 
certifications 
regarding 
quality 
measurement, 
 
Management, Management for Results, Setting Performance Goals 
and Targets, 

Page -186                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
 
Job Analysis: Job Description, Job Specification, Performance 
Evaluation, 
 
Suggested Readings: 
 
Quality Management Systems: 
 A Practical Guide Howard S Gitlow 
 
Quality Management- Principles & Practice Geoff Vorley & Fred Tickle 
 
Putting Total Quality Management to Work Marshal Sashkin &  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Kenneth J.Kiser  
(iii) Information Technology and MS Office 
 
Fundamentals of Computer: CPU, Memory Devices, Types of 
Computers, Characteristics of Computer and Related Material 
 
Application Software: Microsoft Word, Microsoft Power Point, 
Microsoft Excel 
 
Search Engines, Web Design, Email, Internet Surfing, Social 
Networking (Facebook, Twitter, etc.) 
 
General Introduction to Virus and Antivirus utilities.  
 
Programming Languages 
 
Suggested Readings: 
 
Understanding Computers: Today and Deborah Morley, Charles Parker Tomorrow 
 
MS Office Handbook 
Optional Papers 
1. 
Accountancy and Auditing 
 
Principles of Accounting and their applications to all types of Business 
Organizations— Banking, Insurance, Investment, Trading and Industrial Concerns, 
Accounting for non-profit Organizations, Work-sheet, Financial statements, Financial 
Reporting, Financial Analysis and Budgeting, Depreciation, Partnership.  
 
Principles of Auditing, The Accounting System, its importance to Independent 
Audit, Internal Control, Internal Audit, Rights and Duties of Auditors. Professional 
Liabilities of an Auditor, Application of Auditing Principles and Techniques to all Types 
of Trading, Commercial, Industrial, Banking, Insurance and Investment under-takings, 
Audit programme, Special Audit Investigation of actual or suspected Frauds, Limitations 
of Audit, Audit Report, Certificates and Opinion as required under Companies Act, 
Securities Exchange Authority Rules, Auditing and EDP Systems.  
 
Suggested Readings: 
 
Accountancy  
 
 
 
 
Pickles, W. 
 
Principles and Practice of Book Keeping & Accounts 
Vickery, B.G.  
 
Auditing  
 
 
 
 
Dicksee, L.R. 
 
Companies Act 1984 Practical Auditing 
 
Spiecer and Pegler 
 
Principles and Procedure of Auditing  
 
Kh. Amjad Saeed 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -187 
 
 
2. 
Basic Mathematics and Statistics 
 
A. 
Basic Mathematics 
Order of Arithmetic Operations, Placing and Decimal Point, Computation, 
Significant Digits, Weights, Measures, Directed Numbers, Operations with Zero 
and with One, Simple Functions and their Graph Linear Equation, Ratios and 
Trigonometric Functions, Linear Inter-polations Square Roots, Exponents and 
radicals, Permutations and Combination. The Binomial Expansion, Mathematics, 
Applied to Business Operations. Murices, Differentiation.  
 
B. 
Statistics  
Introduction-Nature of Statistics. Common Statistical measures, and Samples, 
Statistical measures of Data Statistical-Description of Data, Probability. The 
Binomial Distribution, Estimation of Parameters, Inference Concerning Two 
populations. Correlation and Prediction, Simple Regression, Analysis of Variance, 
Chi-Square, Index Number.   
 
Books Recommended: 
 
Mathematics Essential for 
 
 
Walker, H.M. 
 
Elementary Latest Ed. 
 
 
 
Business Mathematics. 
 
 
Rosenberg, R.Lewis H.Poe, R.W 
 
Elementary Statistical Concepts. 
 
Walpole, R.T 
 
Basic Statistics for Business and 
 
Hoel, P.C & Jessen, R.J.  
 
Economics 
 
Introduction to Statistics 
 
 
Steel, R.D. and Torrie, J.H 
 
Business Statistics  
 
 
Syed, N.A. and Gill, G.H 
 
Modern Elementary Statistics 
 
Freund, John E 
 
Statistics for Business 
 
 
Whitehead P. and Whitehead, G. 
3. 
Business Administration 
Management: Nature and Scope of Management-Different Schools of thought, 
Planning—Planning process; Planning tools; Change Management, Organization—Type 
of Organization; Theory of Organization; Group dynamics; Staffing; Actuating—
Leading; Approaches to Leadership—Coordinating; Communicating; Motivating. 
Marketing: An overview of Marketing; Marketing‘s Role in Society and inside a 
Firm; Environment of Marketing; Strategic Planning and Marketing;     
Financial Management: Nature and Scope of Financial Management; Interpret-
ation of Financial Statement—Ratio analysis, Trend analysis— Common  size analysis; 
Time Value of Money—Concept of TVM; Net Present Value; Pay Back period; Internal 
rate of return; Working Capital Management— Cash Management; Receivable 
Management; Inventory Management; Accounting—Accounting Cycles, Preparation of 
Financial Statements; Balance Sheet, Income Statement.  
 

Page -188                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
 
Suggested Readings 
 
Management  
 
 
 
James A.F. Stoner & Charles Wank 
 
Fundamentals of Marketing  
 
William J.Stanton 
 
Fundamentals of Financial Management  
Van Horn 
4. 
Computer Science 
Operating System: Function/Types of operating system, Processes, Inter process 
 
Communication / Synchronization/Co-ordination, Process Scheduling Policies, 
 
Virtual 
Memory 
Management 
Techniques; 
Paging/ 
Segmentation, 
File 
 
Management Systems.   
Computer Networks: LAN/WAN/MAN, Communication channels  
Internet, 
 
Network layer structure, ISO Internet Protocol, OSI/TCP/IP  
reference model. 
Structured and Object Oriented Programming: Basics of C/C++ environment, 
 
memory concepts, operators, control structures, selection structures, Array & 
 
functions/methods, classes & data Abstractions, inheritance and polymorphism. 
Data Base Management: Data Models, E-R Models, Relational Database 
 
concepts, SQL, Normalization, Database Design. 
Web Programming: HTML,CGI, PERL, Java: Applet/Script, WWW, Web based 
 
interface Design. 
Computer Graphics: Fundamentals of input, display and hard copy  
devices, 
 
scan conversion of geometric primitives, 2D and 3D geometric transformations, 
 
clipping and windowing, scene modeling and animation, algorithms for visible 
 
and surface determination.  
 
Suggested Readings 
 
Computer Concepts  
J.J. Parsond & D.Oja 
 
Java Script: The Definitive Guide 
D. Flanagan 
 
 
 
The HTML Source Book 
I.S. Graham 
 
 
 
Computer Science: An Overview 
J.G. Brookshear  
 
Java: An Object First Approach 
F.Culwin 
 
 
Algorithms and Data Structures 
N.Wirth 
 
Introduction to Database Systems 
C.J. Dat & Addison Wesley 
 
Computer Networks 
S. Tanenebaum   
 
Operating System Concepts 
Silberschatz & J. Peterson,  
 
 
Computer Graphics: Principles and Practice 
Foley/Van Dam/Feiner/Hughes 
 
Computer networks and Internet 
D.E.Comer 
 
 
Data Base Processing, Fundamentals-design 
David M. Kropnke 
 
Implementation 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -189 
 
 
5. 
Constitutional Law including Constitution of Pakistan 
 
Constitutional Law— Principles of Constitutional Law with special 
reference to United Kingdom, United States of America, Pakistan and India.  
 
Constitutional developments in Pakistan since 1947, 18th ,19th and 20th 
amendments in the Constitution, Inter-Governmental Relationship: Political 
and fiscal including National Finance Commission Award and Water 
Accord, Cabinet, legislative and judicial system, fundamental rights, 
Principles of Policy, Provincial Autonomy, Procedure for amending the 
constitution, control of natural resources, etc.  
Suggested Readings: 
Constitution of Pakistan 
 
 
 
 
Monir, M. 
Constitutional Development of Pakistan 
 
 
Choudhry, A.G. 
Governments and Parties in Continental Europe 
 
Lowell, A.L. 
Introduction to the Study of the Law of the Constitution  
Dicey  
6. 
Development Economics 
 Introduction, and Understanding Economic Development 
 Theories of Economic Growth and Development  
 The Structure of a Dual Economy, Rural-Urban Migration and Development 
 Agricultural Transformation and Rural Development 
 Population, Labour Markets, Income Distribution and Poverty Alleviation  
 The Role of State and Institutions 
 The Environment and Sustainable Development 
 The Link between Trade and Development 
 Foreign Aid, and Financing Development  
 Microfinance and Micro-development topics 
 Theory of Comparative costs, Arguments for Protection, Balance of 
payments, International liquidity, International Money and Banking 
Institution. 
Suggested Readings: 
Economic Development 
 
 
Todero, Michael &  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Stephen Smith 
Economics of Development  
 
Perkins, D.H., S.Radelet, D.R.  
 
 
 
 
 
Snodgrass, M.Gillis, 
 
 
 
 
 
M.Roemer  
Development Economics   
 
Ray D 
The Handbook of Development 
 
H.B. Chenery and T.N Srinivasan 
Economics 
 
Factors in Economic Development  
Cairncross, A.K 
Foreign Aid Theory and Practice in  
Wolf, Jr. DC 
Southern Asia 
Introduction to International Economics 
Snider, D.A. 

Page -190                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
7. 
Economy of Pakistan 
 
Planning Experience of Pakistan: A critical evaluation of the strategy of 
economic planning. 
 
Agricultural Development in Pakistan: Changes in Agricultural Policies over 
plan periods, Major Monetary and Fiscal measures to promote Agricultural development, 
Green Revolution Strategy and its implications for growth and redistribution, Land 
Reforms and changes in the Tenure System 1950—1980, Cooperative Farming.  
 
Industrial Development in Pakistan: Early industrialization strategy, Creation of 
Financial and Development Institutions, Major monetary and fiscal measures to promote 
industrial development, changing role of public sector over the plan periods, Evaluation 
of Nationalization Policy, Concentration of industrial income and wealth.  
 
Role of Foreign Trade and Aid in economic development: Trends in Pakistan‘s 
Balance of Payments, Changes in direction of trade, Trends in Pakistan‘s major exports 
and imports, Causes of significant changes in the trends, the role of migration and 
remittances in Pakistan‘s economy, costs and benefits of Foreign Aid. 
 
Privatization, denationalization and deregulation, conceptual and operational 
aspects. International comparisons.    
Energy Issues facing Pakistan 
 
Suggested Readings: 
 
Under Development and Agrarian  
 
 
Mahmood Hassan Khan 
Structure in Pakistan 
 
 
Studies in Economic Development with  
 
Ghouse, A 
Special Reference to Pakistan  
 
The Economics of Developing Countries 
 
Hynit, H. 
The Economy of Pakistan 
 
 
 
Khawja Amjad Saeed 
Issues in Pakistan Economy  
 
 
Akbar Zaidi 
Economic Survey of Pakistan 
 
 
Ministry of Finance 
8. 
English Literature 
 
The paper will cover the study of English literature from 1798 to 1900 with special 
reference to the works of  W. Blake, Wordsworth, Shelley, Keats, Byron, Charles Lamb, 
Dickens, Tennyson, Robert Browning, Hardy, George Eliot, J.S. Mills, Ruskin and Oscar 
Wilde.  
 
Evidence of first-hand reading will be required. The paper will be designed to test 
not only the candidates knowledge of the prescribed authors works but also their 
understanding of the main literary trends during the period. Questions having a bearing 
on the social and cultural back-ground of the Period also be included. 
 
Suggested Readings: 
 
A Guide to English Literature 
 
Ford, B. Pelican Series 7 Vols 
 
History of English Literature  
 
Legouis and Cazmian 
 
History of English Literature  
 
Hudson 
 
The 19th Century Back Ground 
 
Basil Willey 
 
20th Century Views  
 
 
Abrahams, M.H. 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -191 
 
 
9. 
History of Pakistan and India 
 
Arrival of European nations—decline and fall of Muslim Rule, contributions of 
Shah Wali Ullah, Syed Ahmed Shaheed and Sir Syed Ahmed Khan towards regeneration 
of the Muslim—Hindu reform movements and anti-Muslim role of Hindu leaders.  
 
Constitutional reforms of the British Government and growth of the Political 
Parties— Indian National Congress, All India Muslim League.  
  
Partition of Bengal, Simla Deputation, Role of Nawab Mohsin-ul-Mulk, Nawab 
Viqar-ul-Mulk, Syed Ameer Ali, the Agha Khan and other Muslim leaders, Luknow pact; 
Khilafat movement. Contribution of Maulana Muhammad Ali, Allama Iqbal, Quaid-i-
Azam Muhammad Ali Jinnah for Muslim uplift and welfare.  
 
Nehru report, Quadi-i-Azam‘s Fourteen Points, Allama Iqbal‘s Allahabad Address 
1930, Round Table Conference. The Congress role in the provinces, Lahore Resolution 
1940, various missions and plans for the partition of the sub-continent. Quaid-i-Azam as 
an organizer of the Muslim League Muslim leader and maker of Pakistan.  
 
Constitution making in Pakistan—various attempts at constitution making. 
Difficulties in establishing a parliamentary democracy, imposition of various Martial 
Laws, nature of Pakistan‘s economy, development plans. Role of foreign aid.  
 
Separation of East Pakistan, causes and effect: Pakistan and the World—major 
powers, Islamic world, relations with India. Social and intellectual trends after 1947. 
Contribution of Quaid-i-Azam as First Governor General and Liaquat Ali Khan as first 
Prime Minister.  
 
Suggested Readings: 
 
Constitutional History of India 
 
Keith A.B. 
Government & Politics in Pakistan 
 
Ahmad Mushtaq. 
Pakistan & India 
 
 
 
G.W. Choudhry 
Political System in Pakistan  
 
Khalid Bin Saeed 
Pakistan the Formative Phase 
 
Khalid Bin Saeed 
Political Parties in Pakistan Vol. I &II 
Afzal, Rafique.  
Two Nation theory  
 
 
Shafiq Ali Khan  
The British Raj in India 
 
 
S.M. Burke, Salim Al-Din Qureshi 
10. 
History of USA 
 Introduction: From ancient times to 1492, Advent of the Europeans to British 
supremacy (1492-1606) 
 USA as a British Colony (1606-1783) 
 USA as an Independent Country (1783-1819) 
 Expansion of USA: From 13 to 50 States (1820-1949) 
 Constitution of the USA: Salient Features 

Page -192                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
 Civil War between the North and the East (1850-1869) 
 Industrialization and its emergence as one of the world powers (1870-1916) 
 USA‘s role in the Two World Wars (i.1914-1918, ii.1939-1945) 
 Post 1945 world scenario & emergence of USA & USSR as the Two World 
Powers. 
 American Role in patronizing UNO and International Organizations 1945-
2012 
 American Role in Cold War and its emergence as the Sole World Power 
(1945-1990) and Pakistan‘s Role in this connection 
 International Concerns of USA: An Overview 
 The War on Terror and the Role of Pakistan and USA (2001-2012) 
  Global perception of the USA. 
 
Suggested Readings: 
 
The Ideological Origins of the American  
 
Bailyn. Bernar, 1992 
 
Revolution  A Pocket History of the                              Commager, H. and  
 
United States 
 
 
 
 
Nevins, Allan,1967 
 
Painless American History   
 
 
Curt Lader, 2009 
 
The Politically Incorrect Guide to American   
E.Woods, Thomas Jr., 
 
 
History 2004 
 
The Civil War; A Narrative  
 
 
Foote, Shelby,1986 
 
The American Political Tradition and the Men  
Hofstadter.  
 
 
Who Made it. 
 
 
 
 
Richard,1948 
 
US-South Asian Relations 1784-1940: A History 
Iftikhar H. Malik, ed., 
 
Perspective 2006 
 
The Tragedy of Great Power Politics   
 
Mearsheimer,  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
John,2001 
 
Enlightenment Revolution and the Birth 
 
Nelson, Craig, 
 
of Modern  Nation 2006  
 
 
 
Thomas Paine, 
 
The USA :1917-1980 
 
 
 
Smith, Nigel,2006 
 
American Colonies: The Selling of North America   
Taylor, Alan,2002 
 
White Over Black: American Attitudes Toward the 
Winthrop D.Jordan 
 
Negro 1550-1812  
 
The Complete Book of U.S. Presidents 2005 
 
William. A. De 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Gregorio, 
 
A people‘s History of the United States:1492  
Zinn, Howard,1980 
 
to Present 
11. 
Geography 
 Cultural Geography: Concept of culture in Geography: human races and 
their distribution; major language families and their distribution; main  
religions 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -193 
 
 
(Buddhism, Christianity, Hiduism, Islam, Judaism) and their spheres of influence; 
cultural diffusion; cultural regions of the world.  
 Environmental Geography: Human ecological adaptations; transformation of 
nature by man; environmental degradation and conservation; ecosystems and their 
management; global ecological imbalances-problem of pollution, global warming, 
reduction in bio-diversity and depletion of forests.   
 Economic 
Geography: 
World 
economic 
development-measurement 
and 
problems; world resources and their distribution; energy crisis; the limits to  
growth; 
world agriculture— typology of agricultural regions; agricultural inputs and productivity; 
food and nutrition problems, famine—causes, effects and remedies; human developments 
indicators, world industries—location patterns and problems; patterns of world trade. 
 
 Population and Settlement Geography: Growth and distribution of world 
population; demographic attributes; causes and consequences of migration;  concepts of 
over—, under— and optimum population; carrying capacity of the physical environment; 
problems associated with overpopulation; types and patterns  of rural settlements; 
hierarchy of urban settlements; concept of primate city and rank-size rule; functional 
classification of towns; sphere of urban influence; rural-urban fringe; satellite town; 
problems of urbanization.  
 Regional Geography: Regional geography of South Asia with special reference to 
Pakistan under the following heads: Environmental setting (physical and climatic); 
population, hydrology; irrigation; agriculture; natural vegetation; mineral and power 
resources; major industries; trade and communication.  
 
Suggested Readings: 
 
Population Geography 
 
 
Barrett, H 
 
Hand Book of South Asia 
 
 
Bradnock, R.W.A,  
 
Concepts and Regions in Geography  
Deblij, H.J.D.  
 
The Integrated Human Geography 
 
Home, B 
 
An Introduction to Economic  
 
Khan F.K 
 
Geography  
 
Geography of Pakistan 
 
 
Khan F.K 
 
The Geography of Economic Activity  
Thoman, Conklin and Yeats 
 
Environmental Geography: Science,  
Marsh, W.M. and Grossa J.  
 
Land Use and Earth Systems 
12. 
International Relations 
 
The modern state system—history, basic features, evolving forms. 
 
International Relations as a field of study, Basic Approaches—Power, 
Balance of Power, Imperialism, Nationalism. 
 
Interaction between states—diplomacy, International Law, international 
economic and trade linkages—pressures in world politics.  

Page -194                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
 
Evolution of the International System since 1815 (Congress of Vienna) 
Historical Overview.  
 
Would War I,II, Decolonization, Rise of the Third world Alliance System 
(NATO, SEATO, CENTO, WARSAWPACT) Peaceful coexistence: Non-
Aligned Movement Theories of Peace and Security in Nuclear  Age 
(Deterrence, Limited war, Crisis Management etc.) Détente. 
 
Foreign Policies of the Superpowers, major powers (USA,USSR, China) 
with special reference to South Asia (India, Pakistan, etc.). 
 
Regional Security issues and crises (Afghanistan Crises, Iran—Iraq war, 
Palestine problem, Aparthied and South Africa, Namibia, Polish crises, 
Euro communism, Central American crises etc.). 
 
 Suggested Readings: 
Issues in Global Politics 
 
 
 
Gavin Boyd 
World Politics Since 1945  
 
 
Peter Caluocorassi 
International Relations: Peace or War 
 
Richard Rosecrance 
 
Relations of Nations 
 
 
 
Frederick Hartman 
Contending Theories of International Relations 
Tames Dougherty 
 
13. 
Political Science 
 
Western Political Thought: Plato, Aristotle, Machiavelli, Montesquieu, 
Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau, Bentham, Mill 
 
Muslim Political Thought: Al-Farabi, Al-Mawardi, Al-Ghazali, Ibn-i-
Khaldun, Iqbal 
 
The nature and emergency of Modern state system, Islamic concept of state . 
 
Political concepts , Sovereignty, Law, Liberty, Equality, Rights and Duties. 
 
Political Dynamics: Public Opinion, Propaganda, Political parties, Pressure 
Groups. 
 
Political Institutions: Legislature, Executive, Judiciary, Political Elites, Civil 
and Military Bureaucracy. 
 
Forms of Government: Monarchy, Democracy, Dictatorship, Unitary, and 
Federal, Presidential and Parliamentary. 
 
Totalitarianism: Fascism, Communism. 
 
Local Self-Government: Theory and Practice with special reference to 
Pakistan. The nature and emergence of Modern state system, Islamic 
concept of state. 
 
 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -195 
 
 
 
Suggested Readings: 
 
History of Muslim Philosophy 
 
 
M.M. Sharif 
 
Comparative Politics: A Would View 
 
Almond & Powell 
 
Contemporary Political Analysis 
 
 
Garles Worth James 
 
History of Political Theory 
 
 
George H.Sabine  
 
Political Thought in Medieval Islam 
 
Rosenthal 
 
Political Thought in perspective 
 
 
William Edenstein 
 
Patterns of Governments  
 
 
Samuel H. Beer, Adem  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B. Ullam 
 
Pakistan A Political Study  
 
 
Keith Callard 
 
Politics, Parties and Pressure Groups 
 
V.O. Key Jr . 
 
Modern Political System: Asia 
 
 
Roy, C. Macradis (Ed.) 
 
Politics in Pakistan: Nature and Direction 
 
Khalid Bin Sayeed 
 
of Change 
 
 
Reflection on Government  
 
 
Earnest Barker 
 
The Political System of Pakistan  
 
 
Khalid B. Sayeed 
 
14.  
Public Administration: 
 
Public Administration.— Its nature and scope, the role of Public 
Administrative in a modern Welfare State. 
 
Major Schools of thought in Administration .— Scientific Management 
Movement, Human Relationists; Behavioural School; Systemic theory. 
 
Bureaucracy.— Concept of Bureaucracy, Theories of Bureaucracy, 
Ecology of Bureaucracy of Pakistan as a Change Agent. 
 
Administrative Leadership.— Approaches to the study of Leadership 
Forms of Leadership, Leadership qualities. 
 
Administrative Accountability.— Internal and External Controls; 
Executive Control, Legislative Control,  Judicial Control, Ombudsman, 
Public Opinion and Pressure Groups; Problems of Administrative 
Accountability in Pakistan. 
 
Planning.— Types of Plans, Planning Process; Principles of Planning, 
Planning Machinery; the system of planning and programming in 
Pakistan, Planning Machinery in Pakistan. 
 
Controlling and Co-Ordination.— Forms of Controls, Control 
Mechanism, the process of Control, Principle of Controlling; Principles 
of coordination; Machinery for Coordination; Problems of Coordination 
in public Administrative in Pakistan. 
 
Administration.—Elements of Financial Administration, Performance 
and Programmed Budgeting, Capital Budget, Principles of Budgeting, 
Auditing and Accounting. 
 
 An Introduction to the Public Administration  
E.N. Cladden. 
 
 Administrative Behaviour 
 
 
Herbet, A Simon. 
 
 
Bureaucracy: Modern Society 
 
 
Pebr, M. Blau. 

Page -196                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
 
Human Relations Administration   
 
Robert Dubir. 
 
Introduction to the Study of Public   
 
L.D. White.  
 
Administration 
 
 
 
Public Administration for a Welfare State 
 
Paul Abbleby. 
 
Public Administration Theory and Practice  
Fesler, James W. 
 
Research on the Bureaucracy of Pakistan 
 
Braibanti, Raplh. 
 
The Human Side of Enterprise 
 
 
Douglas McGregor. 
 
The Bureaucracy of Pakistan  
 
 
Charles F.Kennedy. 
 
The above Recommendations will not only ensure quality induction through the 
SOPE but will also strengthen the governance and functioning of the Federal Secretariat 
which is currently suffering from weak base, bad quality and delivery gaps at Section 
Level.  
 
 
6.3 
Eligibility of Superintendent (BS-17) to Participate in  
Section Officers Promotional Examination 
 
Refer to the subject cited above and to say that a query has received in 
Establishment Division about eligibility of Superintendent (BS-17) for Section Officers 
Promotional Examination (SOPE). It is clarified that grant of BS-17 to Superintendent is 
not a promotion within the meaning of Section-9 of the Civil Servant Act,1973, therefore, 
for all practical purpose, the Superintendents granted/placed in BS-17 are the substantive 
holders of the post in BS-16 and are eligible for taking SOPE subject to completion of all 
other conditions/codal formalities.  
[Authority:- Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 7/5/2014-T-V dated 29-12-2016]. 
 
6.4 
Appointment by Transfer in Office Management  
Group (OMG), (Conduct of Examination) Rules,2020 
S.R.O 1182(I)/2020.— In pursuance of orders of Supreme Court of Pakistan 
dated 30-03-2017 passed in Crl Original Petition 182 of 2016, the Chairman, FPSC in 
pursuance of Section 7-A of FPSC Ordinance,1977, and with the approval of the Federal 
Government has made rules for regulating and conduct of examination from time to time 
for Appointment by Transfer in Office Management Group (OMG). 
PART-I 
SHORT TITLE, COMMENCEMENT, DEFINITIONS 
1. 
Short title and commencement:— 
 
(i) 
These rules may be called, Appointment by Transfer in Office 
Management 
Group 
(OMG), 
(Conduct 
of 
examination) 
Rules,2020. 
(ii) 
They shall come into force at once. 
Requisition, Eligibility, Application, Fee, Examination, Merit 
2. 
Requisition by the Establishment Division.— The Establishment 
Division shall send a requisition to the Commission indicating total 
number of vacancies to be filled through Appointment by Transfer in 
Office Management Group (OMG).  

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -197 
 
 
3. 
FPSC on receipt of requisition shall proceed with the conduct of written 
examination & selection process under these rules.  
ELIGIBILITY 
3. 
Criteria:— 
 
Following shall be the criteria to be eligible for applying/appearing in the 
Examination:— 
(i) 
Educational/Qualifications:— 
(a) 
A candidate must hold at least a Second Class or Grade ―C‖ 
Bachelor‘s degree in any faculty from one of the 
HEC/PHEC recognized Pakistani Universities or an 
equivalent degree or comparable educational qualifications 
of a foreign University recognized by Higher Education 
Commission, Islamabad. 
(b) 
A candidate who has obtained a Third Division (or ‗D‘ 
grade) in his/her Bachelor‘s degree will be eligible for the 
Examination in cases where he/her has obtained a higher 
Division in Master‘s Degree.  
(c) 
The matter as to which foreign degree is comparable and 
equivalent to corresponding Pakistani degree shall be 
decided by HEC. Therefore, an equivalent certificate issued 
by HEC may be attached with application form.  
(ii) 
Service Requirements:—  
 
(a) 
Regular BS-17 or BS-18 Civil Servant, Provincial Civil 
Servant, Government Servant, Public Servant, or officer of 
Autonomous body/Corporation having served on deputation 
in Federal Secretariat on Section Officers post for a period 
of three (03) years is eligible to appear in the said 
Examination. 
(b) 
For appointment by transfer as Section Officer in OMG, a 
holder of BS-17 post can only apply for BS-17 and a holder 
of BS-18 can only apply for BS-18 post.  
(iii) 
 Age-Limits:—  
A candidate for admission to the examination must have attained 
the minimum age of 30 years on the closing date for receipt of 
application as advertised by the Commission. 
(iv) 
Age-Relaxation:—  
No age relaxation shall be allowed in any case. 
 
Date of Birth:— 
The date of birth accepted by the Commission shall be that entered 
in the following documents, however the decision as to which 
certificate shall be accepted rests with the Commission:—  

Page -198                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
(a) 
Matriculation Certificate; 
(b) 
Secondary or Higher Secondary School Leaving Certificate; 
(c) 
Certificate of birth from the Principal/Headmaster of the 
School from where a candidate has passed his/her GEC, ‗O‘ 
level or equivalent examination showing the date of birth in 
the School Admission Register;  
(d) 
In case of Christian candidates, Baptismal or birth 
registration certificate;  
(e) 
Authenticated by service record. 
 
(v) 
Departmental Permission Certificate for Appointment by 
Transfer in OMG.—Departmental Permission Certificate (DPC) 
as at Annex-A of the Application Form may be provided within 
one month of the closing date. However, candidate shall submit an 
advance copy of application on prescribed form to FPSC on or 
before closing date to avoid rejection due to delay that may occur 
in processing of DPC by the Government channels. 
(vi) 
Certification of Service on deputation in OMG.—A Certificate 
issued under the signature of Joint Secretary, Establishment 
Division as per Specimen at Annex-B duly filled in and furnish to 
Secretary, FPSC within one month of closing date. 
 
APPLICATION 
4. 
Application for Examination:— 
All applications for Appointment by Transfer Examination must be 
submitted on line through FPSC website www.fpsc.gov.pk, on or before 
the closing date for receipt of applications as advertised by FPSC:— 
(i) 
Print out of the duly filled Online Form (i.e. Hardcopy) may be 
obtained and after signing it, copies of all documents/certificates 
(as mentioned at sub-rule-vi) may be attached with it and furnished 
to FPSC so as to reach the FPSC (Headquarters) within 10 days of 
the closing date. Preferably, the hardcopies may be dispatched or 
furnished before the closing date so that delay in transit may be 
avoided. Onus of proof of dispatch of hardcopy of online form and 
documents, before the closing date, shall solely lie on the 
candidate.  
(ii) 
Candidates are cautioned that if an online application is received 
incomplete or wrongly filled in or its hardcopy is not accompanied 
with any one of the documents mentioned at sub-rule (vi), it will 
be rejected.  
(iii) 
Hardcopy of the online application, if reached to FPSC after the 
stipulated period of 10 days from the closing date, it shall not be 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -199 
 
 
accepted and online form already submitted to FPSC shall stand 
rejected.  
(iv) 
The hardcopy of the online form shall have the same entries as 
made in the online form submitted to FPSC, and any variation shall 
cause rejection of candidature. 
(v) 
No plea that hardcopy of online application form or any 
document attached with it has been lost or delayed in the post shall 
be entertained. 
(vi) 
The candidates must send the following documents with their duly 
signed Applications, else their applications shall be rejected:— 
(a) 
Recent 4 photographs (attested on back side, mentioning 
name and father‘s name or husband‘s name). 
(b) 
Attested copy of Computerized National Identity Card. 
(c) 
Attested copy of Matriculation Certificate showing date of 
birth. Provisional Certificate/Result Card/Marks Sheet is not 
acceptable.  
(d) 
Attested copy of Intermediate Certificate. Provisional 
Certificate/Result Card/ Marks Sheets is not acceptable.  
(e) 
Attested copy of Degree(s) along-with Detailed Marks 
Sheets issued by the Controller of Examination.  
(f) 
Attested copy of self Domicile Certificate. 
(g) 
Copies 
of 
Notification(s)/Office 
Order(s) 
of 
each 
appointment/promotion/Deputation as claimed. 
(vii) The candidates must send the following documents within one 
month of closing date else their applications shall be rejected:—  
(a) 
Departmental Permission Certificate (DPC) as per Annex-A 
of Application Form, for proof of working in Ministry/ 
Division/Attached Department/Body/Organization  
(b) 
Certificate from Establishment Division as per Annex-B of 
Application Form, for proof of working in BS-17 or BS-18 
on deputation basis in OMG. 
5. 
Cut off date to determine eligibility:— 
The closing date for submission of applications as advertised by the 
Commission shall be the cut off date to determine the eligibility in terms 
of length of service and age of the candidate, etc., or as otherwise 
mentioned in the advertisement. 
 

Page -200                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
 
EXAMINATION FEE 
6. 
Examination Fees:— 
 The Exam Fee of Rs.2200/- (non-refundable) is to be deposited in 
National Bank of Pakistan under the Head of Account ―C-02101-Organs 
of State, FPSC Exam Fee‖. Blank Treasury Challan (T.R.6) is available at 
FPSC website, which can be downloaded. 
 
EXAMINATION 
7. Examination/Viva Voce:— 
(i) 
The Examination for Appointment by Transfer in Office 
Management Group (OMG) against 10% reserved quota on regular 
basis shall be conducted by the Federal Public Service 
Commission against the number of vacancies as advertised by the 
Commission as and when such requisition is received from the 
Establishment Division. 
 (ii) The Examination shall comprise of the following components:—  
 
(a) Written Examination  
 
(550 Marks)  
 
(b) Viva Voce 
 
 
 (200 Marks)  
(iii) 
The Examination shall be held on the dates as advertised by the 
Commission.  
(iv) 
The Examination shall be held simultaneously at Islamabad, 
Karachi, Lahore, Peshawar and Quetta. The Commission 
reserves the right to finally decide and notify the places of 
Examinations and Viva Voce.  
(v) 
No request for change of centre shall normally be entertained. 
When a candidate, however, desires to change his/ her centre, from 
one indicated in his/ her Application Form for the Examination, he/ 
she should make a written request to this effect to the Secretary, 
FPSC, Islamabad and send it by registered post, as soon as possible 
but not later than 15 days prior to conduct of examination giving 
full justification as to why he/ she desires to do so. Such request 
will be considered only on merit. 
8. 
Number of Attempts 
 
(i) 
A candidate may avail maximum three (03) attempts of the 
examination after attaining the minimum age of 30 years on the 
closing date advertised by the Commission.  
(ii) 
A candidate shall be deemed to have attempted the examination 
and his chance shall stand consumed, if he/she actually appeared in 
any one or more papers of the examination and even if he/she 
tendered blank Answer Book/Sheet and even if rejected 
subsequently. 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -201 
 
 
(iii) 
A candidate, who conceals the number of previous attempts, shall 
be prosecuted leading to his/her dis-qualification in accordance 
with Rule-20 of these Rules. 
 
9. 
Written Examination:— 
 (i) 
The medium of the Examination shall be English.  
 (ii) 
The Examination shall be passed by a candidate as a whole 
 
and not in parts.  
 (iii) 
Subjects for the Examination shall comprise of 550 marks and 
 
as prescribed in Appendix-I.  
 (iv) 
For whatsoever reasons, a candidate who misses any papers 
 
of written examination for medical or any other reasons shall 
 
not be allowed to appear in the remaining papers. 
 
 
(v) 
If a  candidate misses a paper for any reason, separate examination 
 
 
  
in that paper shall not be arranged for him/her. 
10. 
Admission to Examination:—  
(i)  
No candidate shall be admitted to the examination hall who 
 
does not hold a certificate of admission issued by the 
 
Commission and Original CNIC. An admission certificate 
 
generated or down loaded from FPSC website shall be 
 
accepted. Intimation about examination centre and Roll No. 
 
may be down loaded from FPSC website, if not received  through 
 
post.  
(ii)  
A candidate who arrives at examination hall/centre late than the 
time mentioned in Admission Certificate & date sheet, he/she shall 
not be allowed to sit in the examination. 
 
11. 
Disable Candidates:—   
 
 
(i) 
Visually impaired (Blind) candidates may be provided helper 
(writer) or Computer. Other disabled candidates in the categories 
of physically impaired, hearing or speech impaired shall be 
provided computer/helper (writer) if they have been, by any 
Federal or a Provincial Council for Rehabilitation of Disabled 
Persons, declared permanently incapacitated with respect to 
writing and a disability certificate in that regard has been attached 
by them with application form and also requested for provision of 
helper/computer in their application form. The Commission shall 
arrange the helper from within the available staff of the 
Commission deputed at the examination centre. The role of the 
helper would merely be to reproduce in writing the words so 
uttered by the special candidate. No intellectual contribution by the 
helper is permissible. The educational level of the helper would be 
Graduation/Intermediate as per availability at the examination 
centre. No request for choice of helper or venue of the examination 

Page -202                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
shall be entertained. The disabled candidate along-with helper shall 
remain within the examination hall till conclusion of the paper. 
 
 
(ii)  
Extra time of 15 minutes per hour shall only be allowed to visually 
impaired (Blind) candidates. The other categories of disabled 
candidates shall not be allowed extra time.  
 
 
(iii) 
The facility of computer to eligible disabled candidates as given at 
Para 11(i) shall only be provided at FPSC HQs and FPSC‘s 
Provincial Offices. However, no TA/DA shall be admissible. Such 
Computer literate candidates shall fill the relevant entries in the 
online Application Form, else they shall not be allowed to attempt 
the paper on computer. 
 
12. 
Qualifying Marks in Written Examination:—  
 
 
(i) 
A candidate who fails to secure at least 40% marks in any 
subject/paper and 50% marks in the Aggregate shall be considered 
to have failed in written examination and shall not be eligible for 
Viva Voce.  
 
 
(ii) 
No grace marks shall be allowed.  
 
 
(iii) 
Only those candidates who are declared qualified in written 
examination and found eligible in all respects shall be called for 
Viva Voce. 
 
13. 
Viva Voce:—  
 
 
(i) 
There shall be a Viva Voce of 200 marks.  
 
 
(ii) 
Each candidate who is declared qualified in written part of the 
examination shall be interviewed by a Board which shall have 
before them a record of his/her career, both academic and 
extramural. He/she shall be asked questions on matters of general 
interest. The object of the interview is to assess his/her suitability 
for the services for which he/she is entered and in framing their 
assessment, the Board shall attach particular importance to the 
moral and ethical qualities of the candidates, his/her intelligence 
and alertness of mind, his/her vigor and strength of character and 
his/her potential qualities of leadership, knowledge and analytical 
abilities. The Board shall take into consideration his/her extramural 
activities such as sports, debates, hobbies, etc., and their effect on 
his/her physique and character, in assessing his/her merit. 
 
 
(iii) 
All candidates are expected to have basic knowledge regarding 
Islam, Pakistan and Current Affairs. Questions may be asked in the 
Viva Voce on these subjects. Persons securing less than pass marks 
in these subjects shall not be considered for appointment to 
Government jobs, irrespective of their proficiency in other fields. 
However, the Non-Muslim candidates shall not be asked any 
question regarding Islam.  

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -203 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
A candidate called for Viva Voce Test, shall be required to bring 
his/ her original documents, CNIC and Admission Certificate on 
the date he/ she appears for Viva Voce Test. These will be returned 
on the spot if found in order. Any document found to have been 
tampered with, shall be liable to be retained and the candidate, 
liable to be criminally prosecuted in addition to being permanently 
debarred from the Commission‘s Examinations and selections and 
from Employment under Government. 
 
 
(v)  
A candidate who fails to secure at least 50% marks in Viva Voce 
(i.e. 100 marks) shall be considered to have failed and shall not be 
eligible for appointment. 
 
MERIT 
 
14. 
Effect of Ineligibility:— 
 
 
(i) 
Candidates will be admitted to the examination provisionally at 
their own risk subject to their being found eligible in all respects. 
On detailed scrutiny of the applications before or after the 
announcement of result of the written part of the examination, if 
any candidate is found ineligible in any respect under these rules 
for the examination his/her candidature shall be cancelled/ rejected 
regardless of the fact whether he/she has appeared in the 
examination or qualified therein.  
 
 
(ii) 
The result of any candidate, whose candidature is rejected on any 
ground, shall not be declared, irrespective whether he/she, 
failed/passed the examination.  
 
 
 
Note: To avoid “INCONVENIENCE”, candidates are advised in 
their own interest to make sure before appearing at the 
examination that they fulfill all requirements of the rules, 
relating to the examination. 
 
15. 
Determination of Final Merit & Announcement of Result:— 
 
 
(i)  
The candidates who qualify in written examination and Viva Voce, 
their final merit shall be determined by adding marks obtained in 
the written examination and viva voce.  
 
 
(ii) 
When total marks (written examination + viva voce) of more than 
one candidate are equal, the one who gets more marks in viva voce 
shall be treated as higher in merit. If marks in viva voce are also 
equal, the one who gets more marks in written part shall be treated 
as higher in merit. If marks in written part are also equal, the one 
who is older in age shall be treated as higher in merit.  
 
 
(iii) 
The candidates who pass the written examination shall be 
intimated individually as well as through website but the 
candidates who fail in written examination shall not be informed 
individually. They may download detail mark sheets from FPSC‘s 
website. 

Page -204                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
Only FPSC is authorized to announce the result of the 
examination. 
 
16. 
(i) 
The Federal Government sometimes announces public holidays 
at a short notice. The FPSC examinations/ interviews shall not be 
affected by such announcements, unless a decision on 
postponement is conveyed to the candidates.  
 
 
(ii) 
The Commission reserves the right to change the schedule of the 
Examination as well as to cancel any paper(s) or the Examination 
without assigning any reason. 
 
17. 
Application of Provincial/Regional, Women and Minority (Non-Muslim) 
Quota:— No Provincial/Regional, Women and Minority (Non-Muslim) 
Quota shall apply to the Posts filled by Appointment by Transfer in OMG. 
 
18. 
Appointment:— 
 
 
(i) 
The candidates securing highest places on the combined results of 
the Written Examination and Viva Voce and eligible for 
appointment shall be recommended by the Commission in order of 
merit upto the number of advertised vacancies. 
 
 
(ii) 
Success in the Examination confers no right to appointment but 
will be in accordance with Civil Servants Act, 1973 and Rules 
made there under and fulfillment of the required formalities. 
 
19.  
Reserve Merit List/Alternate Nomination:—  
 
 
The Commission will issue its recommendations as per number of 
advertised posts. However, reserve list of qualified candidates (if 
available) will be maintained for a maximum period of six months. In 
case a nominee of the Commission does not join due to any reason, the 
Commission may revise its recommendations for alternate nominee(s) 
from reserve merit list, if so requested by the Establishment Division 
within six months of issue of principal nomination. Reserve list is not 
meant for fresh vacancies. Moreover, in case a nominee of the 
Commission left service after joining, no alternate nomination will be 
issued, because in such a case, the post shall stand consumed. Vacancies 
remained unfilled shall be carried over to next examination. 
PART-II 
Miscellaneous  
 
20. 
Use of Unfair Means, Un-becoming Behavior and Presentation of 
false information:— 
 
 
(i) 
A candidate who knowingly furnishes particulars which are false, 
or suppresses material information, or attempts to influence the 
Commission, or officers or members of the staff of the 
Commission, or tries to obtain support for his/her candidature by 
improper means, or deliberately submits forged certificates, or 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -205 
 
 
tampers with the entries in his/her age, educational and other 
certificates, or mis-behaves in the examination hall or uses unfair 
means including use or attempted use of mobile phone or other 
electronic device for copying, or is found guilty of misconduct 
during Written Examination or Viva Voce or uses filthy and 
unethical language in the Answer Book(s) during written 
examination, may be dis-qualified for this and/or subsequent 
examinations/ selections held by the Commission and/or criminally 
prosecuted and debarred from future and/or removal from existing 
employment under Government.  
 
 
(ii) 
If during the conduct of Examination at a centre/hall, any 
candidate is found in possession of mobile phone or similar 
devices, he/she shall be prosecuted under the rule-20(i). 
 
 
(iii) 
A candidate who, even after his/her appointment, is found to have 
knowingly furnished particulars which are false, or to have suppressed 
material information shall be liable to dismissal from Service. 
 
21. 
Correspondence.— 
 
 
All correspondence may be addressed to Secretary, FPSC. Candidates 
should not write their postal addresses as care of Post Box Number etc. as 
Postal Authorities do not accept registered letters for such an address. In 
all correspondence in connection with Applications, (before receiving 
Roll Numbers) full name of candidates, CNIC number, contact number 
and name of the post/examination applied for, should be mentioned.  
 
22. 
Change of address shall be reported to the FPSC immediately.  
 
23. 
Recounting.— Answer Books are secret documents and therefore, cannot 
be permitted to be seen by the candidates or their representatives nor 
reexamination of Answer Books/Scripts shall be allowed under any 
circumstances. A candidate desirous of getting his/her marks awarded by 
the examiners recounted may submit his/her request, so as to reach FPSC 
within thirty days of the date of display on FPSC‘s website/issue of 
Result Card/Marks Sheet/ along-with a Treasury Receipt of Rs.500/- per 
paper as fee for re-counting of marks only. Accordingly, FPSC may 
revise the result, if so required. No such request shall be entertained, 
thereafter. 
 
 24. 
Representation and Review Petition:—  
 
 
(i) 
A candidate aggrieved by any decision of the Federal Public 
Service Commission may, within thirty days of communication of 
decision, may make a representation to the Commission and the 
Commission shall decide the representation within fifteen days 
after giving the candidate a reasonable opportunity of hearing.  
 
 
(ii) 
A candidate aggrieved by the decision of the Commission made 
under sub-rule (i) may, within fifteen days of communication of 
decision, submit a review petition to the Commission and the 

Page -206                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
Commission shall decide the review petition within thirty days 
under intimation to the petitioner. The decision of the Commission 
on review petition shall be final.  
 
 
(iii)  Save as provided in ―Federal Public Service Commission 
Ordinance, 1977‖, no order made or proceeding taken under 
―FPSC ORDINANCE, 1977‖, or rules made hereunder, by the 
Commission shall be called in question in any court and no 
injunction shall be granted by any court in respect of any decision 
made or taken in pursuance of any power conferred by, or under, 
―FPSC Ordinance, 1977‖. 
 
 
(iv)  Any candidate aggrieved by a decision of the Commission under 
sub-rule (ii) may, within thirty days of the decision, prefer an 
appeal to the High Court.  
 
 
(v) 
Each representation and review petition duly signed shall be 
entertained only if accompanied with Original Treasury Receipt of 
Rs.500/- in each case. 
 
25. 
This issues with the approval of Competent Authority. 
 
[No. F. 7-1/2014 (SOPE)-P&PE.] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IRFAN TARIQ,  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           Assistant Director  
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Federal Public Service Commission  
________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -207 
 
 
Appendix-I 
GUIDELINES OF THE SYLLABUS 
 
Written Examination (550):— 
Paper-I:   
Essay  
 
 
 
(50 Marks Time:2 hours) 
Paper-II:  
English (Precis and Composition)  
(100 Marks Time:03 hours)  
 
 
 
 
 
Precis = 30 Marks  
 
 
  
 
 
 
Comprehension = 30 Marks 
 
 
 
 
Grammar = 40 Marks 
Paper-III: 
Islamiat (100 Marks Time:03 hours)  
Note: 
The Non-Muslim candidates have the option either to take/ attempt Islamiat 
portion of Paper-III or otherwise the marks obtained by them in the paper 
of Pakistan Affairs shall be treated as double in lieu of both Islamiat and 
Pakistan Affairs.  
Paper-IV:  
Pakistan Affairs (100 Marks Time:03 hours)  
Paper-V: 
Current Affairs (100 Marks Time 03 hours)  
Paper-VI: 
Specialized Paper for Office Management Group (100 Marks: Time:03 hours) 
Interview/Viva-Voce: 
 
 
There shall be a Viva-Voce of 200 marks and a candidate who fails to secure 
at least 40% marks in any of the written paper and 50% marks in the 
Aggregate shall be considered to have failed in written examination and 
shall not be eligible for Viva Voce.  
Syllabi:  The Syllabi for Written Examination shall be as under:  
Paper-I: 
Essay: Candidates shall be required to write one essay in English from six 
topics. 
Paper-II:  
Grammar, Precis and Composition: 
 
 (i) 
Precis: Candidates should have the ability to present a précis of a given 
passage which would be selected from current, economic, social, cultural 
affairs.  
 
(ii)  
Comprehension: Two passages related to current, social, economic, 
cultural, political or international affairs will be given for multiple choice 
questions to be answered. 
 
 (iii) Grammar, Vocabulary and Translation: The Candidates will be tested 
in correct usage of English Grammar including synonyms and antonyms, 
Vocabulary and Translation (English to Urdu and Urdu to English).  
 
 
 

Page -208                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
 
 
Suggested Readings: 
 
 
English Idioms  
 
 
McMordie  
 
 
Practical English Usage  
 
Sean (OUP) 
 
 
A Practical English Grammar  
Thomson & Martinet 
 
 
A University English Grammar  
R. Quirk & S. Greenbaum  
Paper-III: 
Islamiat:  
 
 
(i) 
Islam—its concept and meaning, Islamic concepts of Universe 
 
and Humanity, Man as Vicegerent of Allah, Main Characteristics 
of  
Islamic Ideology;  
 
 
(ii) 
Fundamental Beliefs and Practices of Islam: Tuheed (Unity 
 
of  Allah), Risalat (Finality of Prophethood), Akhrat (Day of 
 
Judgment), Salat, Soum (Fasting), Zakat, Hajj, Jehad; 
 
 
(iii) 
Sources of Shariah: The Qur‘an, Sunnah, Ijma (Consensus), 
 
Qiyas and Ijtejad (reasoning); 
 
 
(iv) 
Islamic Way of Life: (a) Social System in Islam (b) Morality 
 
in Islam (c) Islamic Political system (d) Islamic Economic System 
 
(e) Islam and other Civilizations (f) Islam and Terrorism 
 
 
Suggested Readings:  
 
 
Islami Nizam-e-Hayat  
 
 
Khurshid Ahmed  
 
 
Islam: Its meaning and Message  
 
Khurshid Ahmed 
Introduction to Islam 
 
 
Dr.Hamidullah 
Haqeeqat-i-Deen 
 
 
 
Moulana Ameen lslahi 
Paper-IV: 
Pakistan Affairs:  
 
 
(i) 
Ideology of Pakistan-Definition and historical aspects; 
 
 
(ii) 
Pakistan Movement and Political Developments since 1947 
 
 
(iii)  Defense of Pakistan, Terrorism and Counter Terrorism  
 
 
(iv) 
Education and Health System of Pakistan  
 
 
(v) 
Geography of Pakistan: Land, People, Natural Resources,  
Environ-
 
ment, Global Warming and Natural Disasters, Languages, Ethnicity 
 
in Pakistan, Rural and Urban Tensions  
 
 
(vi) 
Agriculture and Industry. 
 
 
Suggested Readings:  
 
 
Geography of Pakistan  
 
 
K.U.Kureshi  
 
 
The Making of Pakistan  
 
 
K.K.Aziz  
 
 
Ulema in Politics 
 
 
 
I.H.Qureshi  
 
 
Ideological Orientation of Pakistan   
Al-Mujahid Sharif 
Towards Pakistan  
 
 
Waheed-uz-Zaman 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -209 
 
 
Paper-V: Current Affairs 
 
 
(i) 
Pakistan‘s relations with its neighbours: Afghanistan, Iran, China, 
and India; 
 
 
(ii) 
Pakistan‘s relations with Muslim World 
 
 
(iii)  Pakistan‘s relations with the United States, Russia, United 
Kingdom and European Union  
 
 
(iv) 
Pakistan‘s relations with Central Asian, ASEAN and African 
Countries 
 
 
 (v) 
Pakistan‘s role in Regional and International Organizations  
 
 
(vi) 
W.T.O and GSP Plus  
(vi) 
Issues in Pakistan Politics 
 
 
 
Suggested Readings: 
 
 
Politics in Pakistan  
 
 
Khalid B.Sayeed  
 
 
Pakistan‘s Foreign Policy  
 
S.M.Burke  
 
 
Pakistan‘s Foreign Policy  
 
Shahid M. Amin  
 
 
Pakistan in 20th Century: 
 
Lawrence Ziring 
 
 
A Political History 
 
 
 
The Military and Politics in Pakistan  
Hasan Askari Rizvi  
 
 
 
The Security of South Asia 
 
Stephen P. Cohen 
Paper-VI: Specialized Paper for Office Management-I: 
 
 
(i) 
Rules of Business, 1973 (20 Marks)  
 
 
(ii) 
Secretariat Instructions and Office Procedure (20 Marks)  
 
 
(iii) 
Constitution of Pakistan, 1973 (20 Marks)  
 
 
(iv) 
Civil Servants Act, 1973 and rules made there under (20 Marks)  
 
 
(v) 
General Financial Rules-Vol-I &Vol-II (20 Marks) 
 
The above recommendations will not only ensure quality induction through 
Examination for Appointment by Transfer in OMG but will also strengthen the 
governance and functioning of the Federal Secretariat which is currently suffering from 
weak base, bad quality and delivery gaps at Section level. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page -210                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
 
 
FEDERAL PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION 
Aga Khan Road, Sector F-5/1, ISLAMABAD 
          
          Website: www.fpsc.gov.pk E-mail: fpsc@fpsc.gov.pk  Fax: 051-9213386-9203410                               
      
 
            
   
APPLICATION FORM FOR 
 
EXAMINATION FOR APPOINTMENT BY TRANSFER IN OMG-2019 
 
Please read carefully the Advertisement, and the Rules for the Examination before filling the Application Form.  
                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.  Name: (Write in capital letters with spelling as per Matriculation Certificate)               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.  Father‘s Name 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. 
 
     
4.   Computerized (NADRA) National Identity Card (CNIC) No. of Applicant:        
    
5.   Encircle the relevant Code:                                                                                                       
                                                  
 
 
6.    If Non-Muslim, whether desires to be examined in Islamyat: 
 
 
        
 
7.  Self Domicile: (Encircle the relevant Code of your Domicile). District of Domicile: …………………………….      
 
Domicile 
Baluchistan 
Khyber 
Pakhtoonkhwa 
(KPK) 
Sindh 
(Rural) 
Sindh 
 (Urban) 
Punjab  
(Including 
Islamabad) 
Azad 
Kashmir 
Gilgit Baltistan 
(GB) 
FATA 
Code 
10 
20 
30 
31 
40 
60 
61 
90 
 
 
8.  Encircle the relevant  
     Code for Exam Centre.    
 
 
The Commission reserves the right to finally decide the places of Examination/ Interviews. 
 
 
 
 
9.   (a) Present Postal Address:  (IN CAPITAL LETTERS):_______________________________________________ 
      ____________________________________________________________________ District:___________________ 
      (b) Permanent/Alternate Address:_________________________________________________________________ 
 
______________________________________________________________________District:__________________ 
      (c) Office Address_______________________________________________________________________________ 
      _______________________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
10.  Contact Nos: 
11. 
ACADEMIC 
For Official Use only 
Receiving Stamp FPSC HQ/Provincial/Regional Office 
 
Batch No. 
 
Diary No. 
 
 
Closing Date: 
Date of Birth as per Matric certificate: 
Exact age on Closing Date: 
d 
d 
- 
m 
m 
- 
y 
y 
y 
y 
 
d 
d 
- 
m 
m 
- 
y 
y 
y 
y 
 
y 
y 
- 
m 
m 
- 
d 
d 
 
 
 
 
2 
0 
1 
9 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
b) 
Religion 
Muslim    
M 
Non-Muslim 
NM 
a) 
Gender Male 
M 
Female 
F 
Transgender T 
 
Yes 
 
No 
Islamabad 
Lahore 
Karachi 
Peshawar 
Quetta 
I 
L 
K 
P 
Q 
Contact/ Phone Nos. 
with City Code 
Please write all Nos. 
Office 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Residence 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cell No. 
 
 
 
 
- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fax No. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-Mail  Address: 
 
 
Applicant‘s Signature 
Date:          
Paste one 
 Photograph here  
 
(Also for female) 
     
-        
-  

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -211 
 
 
QUALIFICATIONS:(must attach proof i.e. certificate/degree(s)) 
 
S# 
Mention here 
Educational 
Qualification 
Name of 
Institution 
attended 
Result Declaration Date 
(Certificate issued only by the 
Controller of Exam will be accepted) 
Board University 
Examining Body 
CGPA/ 
Div/Grade 
Academic  
Awards     
(if any) 
 
Principal 
Subjects 
Day 
Month 
Year 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
Matriculation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
Intermediate 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
Bachelor‘s 
Degree 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Master‘s Degree  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12. 
COURSES/TRAINING AND RESEARCH PUBLICATION relevant to Office Procedure, Secretariat 
Working, Administration, Finance or Procurement etc. (on job training etc. Proof must be attached). 
 
S# 
 
NAME OF COURSE/TRAINING 
AND RESEARCH INSTITUTION & 
LOCATION 
GRADE 
Period 
 
 
(EXACT DATES) 
Mature of 
training 
Weeks 
1 
 
 
From  
d 
d 
m 
m 
y 
y 
y 
y 
Inter-
nee 
On 
Job 
 
 
to 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
From  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
From  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
From  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13. 
(i) 
Do you fall in the category of a disabled candidate? If yes, then encircle the relevant Code: 
 
Disability 
Visually Impaired (Blind) 
Physically Impaired 
Hearing/Speech Impaired 
(deaf or dumb) 
 
 
 
(ii) 
Whether being disabled, you need assistant for attempting the question paper through (encircle the relevant box) 
 
  
Writer/Helper 
Computer (FPSC Headquarters, Islamabad and its Provincial Offices only) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page -212                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
EMPLOYMENT RECORDS  
14. 
Describe employments, including all appointments held:  
 
 
 
(In case additional space is required photocopy may be used) 
15.  
 Extraordinary Leave availed (if any) from ___________________to ____________________(______ years 
_____months _____days). 
 
16. 
  Details of Examinations in which appeared previously:- 
 
Year 
Roll No. 
‗R‘ for 
Rejected 
‗A‘ for 
Absent 
‗P‘ for 
Written Pass 
‗F‘ for 
Written Fail 
‗FF‘ for Fail in 
Final Result 
‗FQ‘ for  
Finally Qualified   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Employment Records 
Status of Office/Deptt/Job 
Nature of Job 
 Must attach proof, attested copies, office 
orders, 
Notification(s) 
of 
appointment, 
promotion etc.  
 
 Where applicable, must attach relieving orders, 
orders of leave without pay, acceptance of 
Resignation or Discharge Certificate, Termination 
Orders etc.  
Pl. write one of the following 
in relevant column  
FGS-Federal Govt. Servant 
PGE-Provin. Govt. Employee 
SGE-Semi Govt. Employee 
AB---Autonomous Body.  
Pl. write one of the following 
in relevant column  
PR-Permanent  
TM-Temporary  
OF-Officiating  
DP-Deputation 
CA-Contract/Adhoc  
S# 
EMPLOYMENT RECORDS 
 Start from first employment in ascending order. 
A candidate who knowingly furnishes any particular 
which is false or suppresses material information 
will be disqualified, criminally prosecuted and 
debarred from employment under the Government 
Period 
(EXACT DATES) 
Please write ‗To-date‘ If still in service 
Status 
Nature of  Job 
Job description 
d 
d 
m 
m 
y 
y 
y 
y 
1. 
Post/ Title & BS: 
From 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Office/ 
Orgn. 
To 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
& City: 
Total: 
 
 
 
 
- 
- 
 
 
2. 
Post/ Title & BS: 
From 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Office/ 
Orgn. 
To 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
& City: 
Total: 
 
 
 
 
- 
- 
 
 
3. 
Post/ Title & BS: 
From 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Office/ 
Orgn. 
To 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
& City: 
Total: 
 
 
 
 
- 
- 
 
 
4. 
Post/ Title & BS: 
From 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Office/ 
Orgn. 
To 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
& City: 
Total: 
 
 
 
 
- 
- 
 
 
5. 
Post/ Title & BS: 
From 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Office/ 
Orgn. 
To 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
& City: 
Total: 
 
 
 
 
- 
- 
 
 
6. 
Post/ Title & BS: 
From 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Office/ 
Orgn. 
To 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
& City: 
Total: 
 
 
 
 
- 
- 
 
 
7. 
Post/ Title & BS: 
From 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Office/Orgn. 
To 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
& City: 
Total: 
 
 
 
 
- 
- 
 
 
8. 
Post/ Title & BS: 
From 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Office/ 
Orgn. 
To 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
& City: 
Total: 
 
 
 
 
- 
- 
 
 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -213 
 
 
 
17. 
 LANGUAGES  
         (A=excellent , B=Good,  C=fair) 
 
Language  
Read  
Write  
Speak  
Standard  
English  
 
 
 
 
Urdu  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18.  
 EXTRA CURRICULAR ACTIVITIES 
 
S. No 
Year 
Extra Curricular  Activities/ Sports/ Hobbies 
From 
To 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19. 
 (i)  PARTICULARS ABOUT PARENTS      (ii) PARTICULARS OF NEAR RELATIVES IN GOVT. SERVICE  
 
 
Father  Mother  
 
S. No 
Name 
Relation 
Designation 
Place of Duty 
Highest Degree obtained 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Date of Death(if applicable) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Your age at his/her death ( if 
applicable) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Designation present/last 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annual income (Land, Property) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annual income of the family 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20.  
  PARTICULARS ABOUT SPOUSE / FIANCÉE 
 
NATIONALITY: ____________________AGE: ____________EDUCATION: ____________________ 
Occupation: __________________________________ DESIGNATION: _________________________ 
21.    
BROTHERS/SISTERS /STEP BROTHERS/STEP SISTERS 
 
S. No 
Relation  
Age  
Occupation  
Education  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22.   
 FINANCIAL STATUS  (encircle relevant column) 
 
1. Upper Middle Class  
2. Middle Class 
3. Lower Middle Class  
4. Low income Group  
 
23.   PERSONAL TRAITS/ INTERESTS 
 
 
________________________________ 
 
________________________________ 
 
 
24 
 PREVIOUS EXPERIENCE OF TAKING PSYCHOLOGICAL TEST   
 
 
 
 
 
Year_______________________                                               

Page -214                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
25. 
Please confirm if following documents have been attached with the application in the following sequence.  
These must be page numbered in continuation of application.   
 
 
Sl.# 
Please tick (  ) for Yes and Cross (X) for No.       
Yes  
No 
Page # 
(a). 
Recent 4 photographs (attested on back side, mentioning name and father‘s name). 
 
 
 
(b). 
Attested copy of Computerized National Identity Card. 
 
 
 
(c). 
Attested copy of Matriculation Certificate showing date of birth. Provisional 
Certificate/Result Card/Marks Sheet is not acceptable. 
 
 
 
(d). 
Attested copy of Intermediate Certificate. Provisional Certificate/Result 
Card/Marks Sheets is not acceptable. 
 
 
 
(e).  
Attested copy of Degree(s) alongwith Detailed Marks Sheets issued by the 
Controller of Examination. 
 
 
 
(f). 
Departmental Permission Certificate (DPC) as per Annex-A of Application Form, 
for proof of working in Ministry/Division/Attached Department/Body/ 
Organization. 
 
 
 
(g) 
 I have initiated and signed DPC (Annex-A) and forwarded to my employer for 
onward submission to FPSC. Copy of forwarding letter is enclosed. 
 
 
 
(h). 
Certificate from Establishment Division as per Annex-B of Application 
Form, for proof of working in BS-17 or BS-18 on deputation basis in 
OMG.  
 
 
 
(i). 
I have initiated and signed Service Certificate Annex-B and forwarded to 
Establishment Division to certify my service in OMG. Copy of forwarding 
letter is enclosed.  
 
 
 
(j). 
Application signed on Page-1 &5. 
 
 
 
(k). 
Any other documents (if attached) 
 
 
 
 
26. 
I certify that the statements I have made in this application Form are true to the best of my knowledge and belief. I 
understand that if any of the above statements is false in any material aspect or omits any material information relevant to my 
previous examinations, service etc. my application is liable to be rejected and if appointed my appointment is liable to be terminated.  
 
31. 
Submission of fake/forged documents and any mis-representation or omission discovered even after appointment 
may render my appointment liable to termination in addition to the action decided by the Commission.  
 
27. 
I have read and understood the Advertisement and Appointment by Transfer (Conduct of Examination) Rules, 
2019 before filling this application form and agree to abide by them. Moreover, I am eligible to apply/ appear in this 
Examination. 
 
  
 
 
 
                                                                               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Applicant‘s Signature 
Date:          

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -215 
 
 
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE 
Important Note: 
 
 
Please write your name and address in Capital Letters at the six spaces given below. Any 
change of address should be reported to FPSC immediately. Also the candidates must arrange for 
communications sent at old address to be redirected or collected. The Commission does not accept any 
responsibility in this respect. Address ―Care of Post Box No‖ etc should not be written as postal authorities 
do not accept registered letters at such addresses. 
No.F.4/37/2019/APT-PPE (Roll No.               )    
Name ...……………………………….……... 
Address………………………………………. 
……………………………………………… 
……………………………………………… 
Post Code 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
No.F.4/37/2019/APT-PPE (Roll No.                   )    
Name…………………………………………… 
Address……………………….............................. 
…………………………………………............... 
…………………………………………............... 
Post Code 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
No.F.4/37/2019/APT-PPE (Roll No.      )       
Name ……………………………………….. 
Address………………………........................ 
……………………………………………… 
…………………………………………….. 
Post Code 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
No.F.4/37/2019/APT-PPE (Roll No.            )       
Name …………………………………………… 
Address………..…………................................... 
………………….………………………………. 
…………………………………………………. 
Post Code 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
No.F.4/37/2019/APT-PPE (Roll No.             )     
 Name ..……………………………………... 
Address……………………………………… 
……………………………………………… 
…………………………………………….. 
Post Code 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
No.F.4/37/2019/APT-PPE (Roll No.                   )    
Name 
………………………..…………………… 
Address…………………….….............................. 
…………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………… 
Post Code 
 
 
 
 
 
 
….……………………………………….………………………………..... 
Acknowledgement Receipt 
 
FEDERAL PUBLIC SERVICE 
COMMISSION 
 
Received Application Form for Section 
Officers Promotional Examination-2016 
 
Mr/Ms._____________________________ 
 
(Name of candidate) 
 
Date_________________  
 
 
(Seal of the FPSC)          
 
 
 
Sign:___________________ 
              (FPSC Receiving Clerk) 
 
Attach additional           

Page -216                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
Annex-A 
FEDERAL PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION 
 
(DEPARTMENTAL PERMISSION CERTIFICATE (DPC) FOR APPOINTMENT BY TRANSFER IN OFFICE 
MANAGEMENT GROUP) 
 
(To be detached by the candidate from the Application Form and  
submitted to candidate’s employing department before the closing date.) 
 
1. 
I have applied for the above Examination on the prescribed form separately. Necessary                                 
departmental 
permission 
may 
kindly 
be 
forwarded 
to 
the 
Secretary, 
FPSC, Islamabad.                                   
Closing date is _______________. 
 
2. 
I have claimed my particulars and Employment Records in my Application Form as under:— 
 
(a) 
Name of candidate: 
(b) 
CNIC No: 
 
 
 
 
Contact # 
(c) 
Father’s Name: 
(d) 
Designation & BS: 
 
 
  
Office Ph.# 
(e) 
Place of Domicile ( District): 
 
(f) 
Parent Ministry/Division/Department/Body/Organization 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Extraordinary Leave availed (if any) from ______________ to__________ (_______ years _____months ______ days). 
 
 
 
Date:_________         (Applicant’s signature)                       
(Continued overleaf…)   
 
 
Employment Record 
Status of Office/Deptt/ Job 
Nature of Job 
 Start from first employment in ascending 
order. 
 
Pl. write one of the following in 
relevant column  
FGS-Federal Govt. Servant 
PGE-Provin. Govt. Employee 
RGE- Regional/ Govt. Employee 
SGE-Semi Govt. Employee 
AB---Autonomous Body 
 
Pl. write one of the following in 
relevant column  
PR-Permanent  
TM-Temporary/ Regular 
OF-Officiating  
DP-Deputation 
CA-Contract/Adhoc 
S 
# 
EMPLOYMENT RECORDS  
Period 
(EXACT      DATES) 
Please write ‘To-date’ If still in service 
Status 
Nature of  Job 
Job 
description 
d 
d 
m 
m 
y 
y 
y 
y 
1. 
Post/ Title & BS: 
From 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Office/Orgn. 
To 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
& City: 
Total: 
 
 
 
 
- 
- 
 
 
2. 
Post/ Title & BS: 
From 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Office/Orgn. 
To 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
& City: 
Total: 
 
 
 
 
- 
- 
 
 
3. 
Post/ Title & BS: 
From 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Office/Orgn. 
To 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
& City: 
Total: 
 
 
 
 
- 
- 
 
 
4. 
Post/ Title & BS: 
From 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Office/Orgn. 
To 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
& City: 
Total: 
 
 
 
 
- 
- 
 
 
5. 
Post/ Title & BS: 
From 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Office/Orgn. 
To 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
& City: 
Total: 
 
 
 
 
- 
- 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -217 
 
 
From pre-page 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                 
                
TO BE FILLED/VERIFIED BY THE DEPARTMENT/ EMPLOYER OF THE CANDIDATE 
 
The Ministry/Division or Department must process this certificate in the light of FPSC Advertisement and 
forward or communicate the refusal as the case may be, to FPSC within one month from the closing date. On 
selection, the department will have to relieve the official for joining the post.  
Important  
Note: 
 This certificate must be processed on Personal File of the employee.  
 The employment record as claimed overleaf, must be checked and verified/ confirmed.  
 This certificate is to be issued after obtaining approval of the Competent Authority.  
 Deputationists must obtain permission from his/ her parent Department. 
 To be signed by BS-17/18 Officer and to be countersigned by BS-19/20 Officer  
    dealing with the Administration/ Appointment/ Promotion & Personal Records etc. 
 
 
File No:________________________ 
 
 
 
Dated :          --           --20          
 
1. 
It is certified that Mr./Ms ____________________________________________________________________________ 
 
is employed as  ______________________________________________________________________ BS ___________ 
     
in Office (Deptt)___________________________________________________________w.e.f.____________________ 
2.  
It is certified that the employment records as claimed overleaf has been checked carefully, it has been confirmed from 
his/her Personal File No. ______________________and found in order. However, the employment records at Sl. No.  
__________ is not verified due to the reason that ______________________________________________ 
3.    
He/she is an Officer of Federal/Provincial/Regional Govt./Autonomous Body/Corporation _______________and placed 
on regular basis in BS-17 on ___________________ and in BS-18 on ___________________.  
4. 
His/Her total period of continuous Government Service till closing date in BS-17 is (_____Years______ 
Month(s)_______ Days) and in   BS-18 is (_____Years______Month(s)_______ Days). 
5.    
As per Appointment by Transfer in OMG (Conduct of Examination) Rules -2019, he/she is eligible to apply  and appear 
in the Exam. 
6.    
Domicile accepted at the time of entry into Government Service was ________________________ 
7.   
No Inquiry Proceedings/ Disciplinary Proceedings are pending against him/her. 
8.   
In case it is decided to forward a case where adverse entries do exist in his/her records, extracts of the adverse entries 
from the relevant PERs should be enclosed for information of the Commission. Also confirm that the adverse remarks 
were communicated to the official and no appeal/petition is pending for decision thereon.  
9.  
This DPC is issued with the approval of the Competent Authority i.e. ____________________________ 
       
 (Authority must be mentioned viz Secretary, Joint Secretary (Admn) or D.G etc.) 
  
Caution:           For any error, omission or misrepresentation the signatory will be held responsible.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note: Incomplete, unsigned or unstamped DPC will not be accepted. 
 
To be sent immediately to:  
 
 
 
The Secretary 
 
 
Federal Public Service Commission 
Aga Khan Road, Sector F-5/1 
Islamabad 
To 
be 
signed 
by 
BS-17/18 
Officer 
dealing 
with 
Administration/ Appointment/ Personal Records  
 
Signature: 
Name 
 
  Official Stamp must be affixed  
 
Tel No:    
 
To be countersigned by BS-19/20 Officer dealing 
with Administration/Appointment/ Personal Records 
 
Signature: 
Name 
Official Stamp must be affixed  
 
 
Tel No: 

Page -218                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
                Annex-B 
FEDERAL PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION 
SERVICE CERTIFICATE 
FOR APPOINTMENT BY TRANSFER IN OMG 
(Under Rule 3(vi) of Appointment by Transfer in Office Management Group (OMG), (Conduct 
of Examination) Rules, 2019) 
This Form can be downloaded from FPSC website: http://www.fpsc.gov.pk 
1. 
I am desirous of applying for this Examination to be held for Appointment by Transfer in OMG. A Service 
Certificate (as required under Rules 3(vi) of Appointment by Transfer in Office Management Group (OMG), 
(Conduct of Examination) Rules, 2019) may kindly be forwarded to the Secretary, FPSC, Islamabad within one 
month of Closing date i.e. _______________. 
2. 
My particulars are as under:- 
a. 
Name of candidate: 
b. 
CNIC No:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contact # 
c. 
Father‘s Name: 
d. 
Designation & BS: 
 
 
 
 
  
Office Ph.# 
e. 
Present Posting with Appointment Held:  
 
f. 
Parent Ministry/Division/Department/Body/Organization 
 
g. 
Period served on Deputation OMG as Section Officer (BS-17) from                        to            ( Y        M       D) 
h. 
Period served on Deputation OMG as Section Officer (BS-18) from                        to             (Y        M       D) 
i. 
Place of Domicile: ( District) 
 
j. 
Office Address: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
k. 
Correspondence Address (if other than office address): 
 
 
 
 
                 
Signature of the Candidate________________________________ 
 
TO BE FILLED / VERIFIED BY ESTABLISHMENT DIVISION 
 
This certificate may be issued under the signature of  Joint Secretary, Establishment Division and 
communicated to FPSC within 30 days from the closing date. On selection, the nominee would join 
OMG as Section Officer.  
 
This certificate must be processed on Personal File of the applicant / employee.  
 
The employment record must be checked and verified/ confirmed to fall in line with the Eligibility 
Criteria.  
 
File No.  
______________________ 
 
 
Dated: _______________________ 
3. 
It is certified that, Mr. _________________ is an officer of Federal/Provincial/Regional Govt./Autonomous 
Body/Corporation_______________ and has served on deputation in OMG as ___________________ in    BS-17 
from _____________________ to _________________ (……..Years…….Month(s)……..Days) and in BS-18 as 
______________  from _______________   to __________ (……..Years…….Month(s)……..Days).  
4. 
There is nothing adverse in his/her last three (03) years Performance Evaluation Reports (PERs).  
Signature::______________________ 
Name:_________________________ 
Designating: Joint Secretary,  
Establishment Division, Islamabad 
 
(Official Seal) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note: Incomplete, unsigned or unstamped NOC will not be accepted. 
 
To be sent immediately to:  
 
 
 
The Secretary 
 
 
Federal Public Service Commission 
Aga Khan Road, Sector F-5/1 
Islamabad 
 
 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -219 
 
 
 
6.5 
The Provincial Management Services (PMS)  
 
 
and Provincial Civil Services (PCS) Induction  
 
 
into Pakistan Administrative Service Rules,2020 
  
In exercise of the powers conferred by section 7-A of the Federal Public Service 
Commission Ordinance, 1977 (XLV of 1977), read with sub-rule (2) of rule 7 of the Civil 
Service of Pakistan (Composition and Cadre) Rules, 1954, the Chairman of the 
Commission, with the approval of the Federal Government, is pleased to make the 
following rules, namely:— 
 
PART-I 
 
1. 
Short title and commencement.—(1) These rules shall be called the 
Provincial Management Services (PMS) and Provincial Civil Services (PCS) Induction 
into Pakistan Administrative Service Rules, 2020. 
 
2. 
Definitions.-(1) In these rules, unless there is anything repugnant in the 
subject or context,- 
a) 
―Commission‖ means the Federal Public Service Commission (FPSC); 
b) 
―Government‖ means the Federal Government; 
c) 
―Provincial Government‖ means the Government of Balochistan, Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa, Punjab and Sindh; 
d) 
―Regional Governments‖ means the Government of Azad Jammu and 
Kashmir (AJK) and Government of Gilgit Baltistan; 
e) 
―Provincial and Regional Civil Service‖ means Provincial Management 
Services (PMS) and Provincial Civil Services (PCS) (i.e. Executive and 
Secretariat service) of the province and AJK Management Group and 
Secretariat Group of AJK and District Management Service and Office 
Management Service of Government of Gilgit Baltistan; 
f) 
―inductee‖ means an officer initially appointed to Pakistan Administrative 
Service (PAS ) in BPS-19 by induction through process of recruitment from 
the Provincial or Regional Civil Service in accordance with these rules; 
g) 
―Rules‖ means the Civil Service of Pakistan (Composition and Cadre) 
Rules, 1954; 
h) 
―Service‖ means Pakistan Administrative Service (PAS); 
i) 
―specialized training‖ means specialized training prescribed for the 
inductees in PAS at a training institution or place as Establishment 
Division may prescribe; and 
j) 
―Specified‖ means specified by rules made by Commission under section 
7A of the Federal Public Service Commission Ordinance, 1977 (XLV of 
1977). 

Page -220                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
(2) 
The expressions used but not defined herein shall have the same meaning 
as are assigned to them in the Federal Public Service Commission Ordinance, 1977 (XVL 
of 1977) and the rules made thereunder.  
PART-II 
Requisition, Eligibility, Application, Fee, Examinations, Merit 
(3) 
Requisition by the Establishment Division.—The Establishment Divis-
ion shall send a requisition to the Commission indicating total number of vacancies, 
province and region wise, to be filled through induction by process of recruitment of 
officers of Provincial and Regional Civil Services into Pakistan Administrative Service in 
BPS-19 under the Rules. 
4. 
Eligibility Criteria.—(1) The officers of provincial management service 
or provincial civil services, i.e. executive and secretariat services, of the Provinces, Azad 
Jammu and Kashmir management group and secretariat group and district management 
service and office management service of Gilgit Baltistan, recruited directly in BPS-17 
through respective public service commission having minimum of twelve years‘ service 
in BPS-17 and above who held a cadre post for a period of five years and presently 
holding post in BPS-19 in the respective service on regular basis shall be eligible for 
appointment in the service in BPS-19 on recommendations of the Federal Public Service 
Commission as stated under these rules: 
Provided that the appointments under this sub-rule shall not exceed thirty percent 
of the appointed share of the service in Federal sub-cadre in BPS-19 and above. 
 
(2) 
Only those candidates shall be eligible to apply who have a minimum 
blood count of seventy five percent and at least three ―very good‖ performance 
evaluation reports (PER‘s), with no ―average‖ PER, in the immediately preceding five 
years in which the application for the FPSC examination is made and it shall be the 
responsibility of the Provincial and Regional Governments to provide the accurate blood 
count and synopsis of PERs.  
(3) 
No candidate shall be eligible for consideration under sub-rule (2) unless 
no penalty has been imposed on the application officer during the last five years nor any 
disciplinary proceedings under the respective efficiency and discipline rules of the 
Provincial and Regional Governments or any inquiry under the accountability laws or any 
criminal proceedings are pending or under trial against him in any court of law.  
(4) 
A no objection certificate (NOC) issued under the signature of Secretary 
(Services) and counter signature of Chief Secretary of the respective Provincial and 
Regional Government as per specimen at Annexure-A duly filled in, shall be required and 
forwarded to Secretary, FPSC within one month of closing date, in respect of the 
candidate desirous to apply under sub-rule (2) and only officers who obtain NOC from 
the respective Secretary (Services) duly countersigned by the Chief Secretary as aforesaid 
shall be eligible to appear in the competitive examination and no exception to this effect 
shall be accorded at all.  
 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -221 
 
 
(5)  Once the seats calculated against 30% apportioned share of cadre posts of 
PAS in Federal sub-cadre in BPS-19 and above are filled under these rules, the future 
vacancies of these seats due to promotion, retirement, death or removal etc. of an officer, 
shall again be available for induction under these rules.  
5. 
Application for the examination.-(1) On receipt of requisition under rule 
2, the Commission shall invite applications from the aspirants through public notice in 
leading newspapers as specified by the Commission.  
(2) 
The aspirants shall apply online till the closing date as specified by the 
Commission.  
(3) 
After applying online the aspirants shall furnish to FPSC bio-data form as 
per Annex-B, so as to reach FPSC within fifteen days of online submission.  
(4) 
Admission certificate shall be issued to the applicants online as per 
practice duly specified by the Commission.  
(5) 
Save as provided in these rules, all candidates may appear in written 
examination provisionally at their own risk subject to their being found eligible in all 
respects. On detailed scrutiny of the application after written examination or 
announcement of result of written part of the examination, if any candidate is found 
ineligible in any respect under these rules, his candidature shall be cancelled regardless of 
the fact that he has appeared in the examination or has qualified thereof.  
  
6.  
Examination fee.-( 1) The application fee and mode of its receipt etc. for 
appearing in the competitive examination shall be such as specified by the Commission 
from time to time.  
 
(2) 
No claim for refund of fee paid under sub-rule (1) shall be entertained nor 
shall the fees paid be held in reserve for another examination or selection.  
 
(3) 
Original receipt of payment or treasury receipt shall be mandatory for 
admission into the examination center. No cash, postal orders, cheques, money orders, 
bank drafts, or bank scroll, bank or office treasury certificate etc. or any other document 
to this end, shall be acceptable at all.  
 
7.  
Competitive 
examination 
for 
induction.--(1) 
The 
competitive 
examination shall comprise following, namely:— 
(a) 
written examination  
 
- 300 Marks 
 
(b) viva voce   
 
 
- 100 Marks 
 
(2) 
Written examination for 300 marks shall be required to be undertaken by 
all the candidates.  

Page -222                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
(3) 
The number of papers, syllabus, duration and marks for each paper, from 
time to time, for the written examination shall be specified by the Commission.  
(4) 
If an officer candidate is absent in a paper for medical or any other 
reasons, no separate examination in the missed paper shall be arranged for him nor shall 
he be allowed to appear in the remaining papers and shall be considered as failed in the 
written examination.  
(5) 
An officer who fails to secure at least forty percent marks in each of the 
papers and fifty percent marks in the aggregate and overall shall be considered to have 
failed in written examination. 
(6) 
 Each candidate officer who is declared qualified in written part of the 
examination shall be interviewed, which is assigned hundred marks, by the same Board 
conducting viva voce of the CSS competitive examination in that year, which shall have 
before them a record of officers' career, and academic and extramural activities.  
(7) 
The Commission shall specify the broad parameters for viva voce.  
(8) 
An officer who fails to secure at least fifty percent marks in viva voce shall 
be considered failed and shall not be eligible for induction.  
(9) 
The Board shall, in framing its assessment as to suitability for induction, 
attach particular importance to officer's aptitude, intellect, mental alertness, strength of 
character; understanding of governance and related statutes, domestic and international 
affairs, social fabric and cultural matrix of Pakistan, service experience and exposure and 
potential for leadership towards holding higher positions shall also be considered.  
(10) Failure in either interview or written part shall be deemed as failure in the 
examination as a whole.  
(11) An officer shall have a maximum of two chances or attempts in his service 
career to appear in the written examination and viva voce.  
(12) An officer shall be deemed to have attempted the examination and his 
chance shall stand consumed, if he actually appears in any one or more papers of the 
written examination and even if he tenders blank answer book or NOC is not issued to 
him by respective Secretary (Services).  
(13) For availing the second chance, the officer must apply afresh and obtain 
NOC from the respective Provincial or Regional Government.  
(14) An officer who conceals the number of previous attempts or any other 
related material fact, shall be prosecuted leading to his dis-qualification for induction and 
initiation of criminal proceedings.  

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -223 
 
 
8.  
Schedule of examination and centers.-(1) The competitive examination 
shall be held simultaneously at Islamabad, Karachi, Lahore, Peshawar and Quetta 
depending upon sufficient number of candidates or a location as determined by the 
Commission on such dates and time as notified for the purpose.  
(2)  Viva voce of the officers qualifying the written examination shall be held 
at Islamabad on such dates and time as notified by the Commission.  
(3)  Once examination center is selected by an officer, it shall not be changed 
and the examination center and hall once allotted to an officer shall be final and he shall 
not be allowed to sit in another centre and hall.   
( 4)  No officer shall be admitted to the examination hall who does not hold an 
admission certificate issued under sub-rule (4) of rule 4, original CNIC and original 
treasury receipt for the payment of fee as stated under sub-rule (3) of rule 5.  
(5) 
An admission certificate generated or downloaded from the FPSC website 
shall be accepted. Intimation about examination center, roll number and schedule of 
examination or date sheet, may be downloaded from the FPSC website.  
(6) 
Obtaining correct information, providing correct information, abidance by 
the rules, completeness of application, provision of complete and upto date documents, 
adherence to the schedule and appearance at specified date and time for the test and viva 
voce shall be the sole responsibility of the candidate and no exception to this end shall be 
considered.  
 
9.  
Determination of final merit.-(1) The officers who qualify in written 
examination and viva voce, their final merit shall be determined by adding marks 
obtained in the written examination and viva voce.  
(2)  When total marks of both written examination and viva voce of more than 
one candidate are equal, the one who gets more marks in viva voce shall be treated as 
higher in merit. If marks in viva voce are also equal, the one who is older in age shall be 
treated as higher in merit. If the date of birth is also same, the one with higher or 
additional qualifications shall be treated as higher in merit.  
(3)  Only the Commission shall announce the result.  
10.  Determination of previous service and performance.-(1) NOC 
containing service record and other essential details of the candidate officer shall be sent 
to the Commission by the respective Provincial or Regional Governments on the format 
as set out in Annex-A.  
(2)  In case of discrepancy in facts reported by the candidate in his bio-data 
form and the contents of NOC sent by the department, details as contained in NOC form 
shall be considered correct and final.  
 
 

Page -224                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
PART-III 
Vacancies, Domicile, Induction, Probation, Unfilled Vacancies, Specialized 
Training, Seniority, Promotion and Pay Fixation 
11.  Vacancies.-(1) Actual number of vacancies in BPS-19 to be filled through 
induction by process of recruitment of officers of PMS/PCS shall be announced by the 
Commission after intimation by Establishment Division. The Establishment Division, 
however, reserves the right to fill a smaller or larger number of vacancies than those 
announced.  
(2) 
 Provincial and regional quotas with inclusion of seven and half percent 
open merit seats shall be as under:— 
Ser 
Province/ Region  
Existing  
Quota  
Distribution  
of 7.5%  
Merit Seats  
Total share  
(1)  
(2)  
(3)  
(4)  
(5)  
1.  
Punjab (including Federal 
Area of Islamabad)  
50% 
Nil 
50% 
2.  
Sindh  
The share of Sindh will be 
further sub-allocated in the 
following ratio:  
 
 
 
 
8.2% 
20.5% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Urban areas namely Karachi, 
Hyderabad and Sukkur  
40%  of  
19% or 7.6%  0.6%  
1.5%  
Rural areas i.e. rest of Sindh 
excluding Karachi Hyderabad 
and Sukkur  
60%  of  
19% or 
11.4%  
0.90% 
12.3% 
3.  
KPK  
11.5% 
 
1% 
 
12.5%   
4.  
Balochistan  
6% 
2% 
8% 
5. 
New 
merged 
Districts 
of   
Khyber Pukhtunkhawa (ex- 
FATA) (This share shall not be 
merged 
into 
Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa and be observed 
independently for next 10 years 
in conjunction with the ten-
year development Plan devised 
to bring the Ex-FATA at par 
with the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa 
socially and economically). 
3% 
1.25% 
4.25% 
6. 
Gilgit-Baltistan 
1% 
0.75% 
1.75% 
7. 
AJK 
2% 
1% 
3% 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -225 
 
 
12.  Domicile.—Vacancies earmarked for prescribed provincial quotas shall be 
allocated to officers on the basis of the domicile certificate declared by him at the time of 
joining the service of the respective provincial or regional government.  
13.  Induction.—(1) Officers securing the highest places in the final merit list 
for the respective provinces and regions and otherwise eligible shall be recommended by 
the Commission in order of merit upto the number of vacancies available for each 
province and region for induction into Pakistan Administrative Service in BPS-19.  
(2)  No officer shall be considered for induction to Pakistan Administrative 
Service if he has been declared un-suitable by the Commission during viva voce. 
14.  Probation period and connection with the PMS or PCS.-(l) Appoint-
ment through induction of the recommended officers shall be made by the appointing 
authority in Pakistan Administrative Service on regular basis.  
(2)  The inducted officers shall be on probation for a period of two years or for 
such period as the appointing authority may extend for and till the successful completion of 
training.  
(3)  On appointment in the Pakistan Administrative Service, the inducted 
officers shall sever their connection with the respective Provincial and Regional 
Governments and shall not hold any lien, except during probation, against post previously 
held as part of provincial or regional civil service.  
15.  Unfilled vacancies and waiting merit list.--(l) Once the process of 
induction is complete on the recommendations of the Commission, the vacancies which 
remained un-filled due to non-availability of qualified officers under any provincial or regional 
quota shall be carried over to next examination for filling from among the same quota.  
(2)  The Commission shall maintain a waiting merit list at the end of 
completion of process, for each provincial and regional quota for forty-five days after 
which the waiting merit list shall not be valid and the process of recommendations for 
induction shall stand completed.  
(3)  Any recommendee of the Commission who does not join and intimation in 
this regard reaches to the Commission within thirty days, the Commission shall 
recommend the next officer candidate on merit in respective quota.  
(4)  The vacancies of non-joiners, reported to the Commission after forty-five 
days shall be carried over to next competitive examination.  
16.  Specialized training programme. - Every officer, inducted in BPS-19, shall 
undergo specialized training for officers inducted in PAS in such training institutions at such 
place and time and for such period as the Establishment Division may intimate.  
17. Seniority, inter se seniority and length of service.--(1) The seniority of the 
inductees shall be reckoned from the date of their regular appointment in Pakistan 
Administrative Service in accordance with the provisions contained in the Civil Servants 

Page -226                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
(Seniority) Rules, 1993. They shall be placed at the bottom of the batch promoted and 
appointed to BPS-19.  
(2)  The length of service of the inductee in respect of his eligibility for 
promotion as prescribed in the Establishment Division's O.M No. l/9/80-R-2 dated 2nd 
June, 1983 shall be counted with effect from the date of his regular appointment in 
Pakistan Administrative Service.  
(3)  The inter-se-seniority of the inductees shall be determined by the 
appointing authority in order of merit assigned by the Commission.  
18.  Promotion to higher rank or pay scales in PAS.-The promotion of the 
inductees to higher rank in PAS shall be governed by the relevant rules applicable to the 
Pakistan Administrative Service and shall be subject to completion of such conditions 
and trainings as are prescribed for such promotion in the Pakistan Administrative Service.  
19.  Pay fixation and pension.--( 1) The pay of the officers inducted in 
Pakistan Administrative Service shall be fixed under the normal rules applicable to civil 
servants of the Government.  
(2)  Without prejudice to other provisions of these rules, the service rendered 
by the inductees as part of Provincial or Regional civil service shall count towards 
pension but not towards seniority and promotion.  
PART-IV 
Miscellaneous 
20.  Use of unfair means, un-becoming behavior and presentation of false 
information.- (1) An officer who knowingly furnishes particulars which are false, 
suppresses material information, or attempts to influence the Commission, or officers or 
members of the staff of the Commission, or tries to obtain support for his candidature by 
improper means, or deliberately submits forged certificates, or misbehaves in the 
examination hall or uses any kind of unfair means as ordinarily perceived to be· as such 
including use or attempted use of mobile phone, smart phone, smart watches or any other 
electronic device or gadgetry for copying or even listening to or receiving information 
through or communicating both overtly or covertly with external agents, or misconducts, 
misbehaves or willfully displays rude behavior or coerce or threaten by any mean during 
examination or viva voce and uses filthy and un-ethical language in the answer book or 
any other written communication or presents false information using any mean to include 
before, during and · after written examination and viva voce, shall be dis-qualified for 
induction and shall be proceeded against under criminal provisions of the Pakistan Penal 
Code, 1860 (Act XLV of 1860).  
 
(2)  An officer who, even after his appointment by induction in Pakistan 
Administrative Service, is found to have knowingly furnished particulars which were 
known to him to be false or to have suppressed material information shall be liable to 
dismissal from service.  
21.  Decision of the Commission. -Decision of the Commission as to the 
eligibility or otherwise of an officer for admission to the competitive examination and 
suitability for induction shall be final.  

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -227 
 
 
22.  Recounting of marks.-(1) Answer books of all subjects and papers of 
the competitive examination are confidential documents and shall not, therefore, be 
permitted to be seen by candidate officers or their representatives nor shall re-examination or 
remarking of answer books and scripts shall be allowed under any circumstances. A candidate 
officer desirous of getting his marks awarded by the examiners re-counted may submit his 
request for the purpose within one month from the date of the issue of result card or marks 
sheet along-with a treasury challan of prescribed fee per paper for re-counting of marks only. 
Thereafter, no such application shall be entertained.  
(2)  Re-evaluation of assigned marks awarded by the viva voce Board shall not 
be allowed under any circumstances.   
(3)  Grace marks shall not be allowed.  
23.  Retention of answer books.- (1) Answer books of the competitive 
examination of the officer candidates shall be retained in the office of the Commission 
for a period of one year only and thereafter shall be destroyed.  
(2)  Any query relating to the answers books after the specified period shall not 
be entertained.  
24.  Representation and review petition.-(1) An officer candidate aggrieved 
by any decision of the Commission may, within thirty days of communication of decision, 
make a representation to the Commission and the Commission shall decide the representation 
within fifteen days after giving the candidate a reasonable opportunity of hearing.  
(2)  An officer candidate aggrieved by the decision of the Commission made 
under sub-rule· (l) may, within fifteen days of decision by the Commission, submit a 
review petition to the Commission and the Commission shall decide the review petition 
within thirty days under intimation to the petitioner.  
(3)  Save as provided in the Federal Public Service Commission Ordinance, 
1977 (XLV of 1977), no order made or proceeding taken, or rules made, by the 
Commission shall be called in question in any court and no injunction shall be granted by 
any court in respect of any decision made or taken in pursuance of any power conferred 
by or under the said Ordinance.  
(4)  Any candidate aggrieved by a decision of the Commission under sub-rule (2) 
may within thirty days of the decision, prefer an appeal to the High Court.  
(5)  Each representation and review petition duly signed by the officer 
candidate shall be entertained only if accompanied with original treasury receipt of the 
fee specified by the Commission for the purpose.  
25.  Correspondence.-All correspondence shall be addressed to the Secretary 
FPSC. Change of address if any, shall be reported to the FPSC immediately.  
26.  Penalty.-(1) An inductee who fails to comply with the provisions of these 
rules, or fails to obey any orders of the appointing authority, or from the employer or 

Page -228                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
Provincial or Regional Government under which he is serving, or from the head of 
training institution or from any faculty member thereof or an officer under whom he may 
be receiving field training, or neglects his studies, or is found cheating or misbehaving 
during examination, or is guilty of misconduct or who mis-behaves in a manner  
un-becoming of an officer shall  be liable for removal from service or to such other action 
as the appointing authority may direct, in accordance with the applicable rules.  
(2)  No adverse orders shall be passed in respect of an inductee unless he is 
given an opportunity to show cause and personal hearing.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -229 
 
 
Annex-A 
Part-I 
FEDERAL PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION 
NO OBJECTION CERTIFICATE (NOC) 
FOR INDUCTION OF OFFICERS OF PMS/PCS INTO PAS 
(As required under Rulc-3(iv) or PMS/PCS Induction into PAS Rules, 2020) 
            (COMPETITIVE EXAMINATION-2020) 
1. 
I applied for the above Examination on the prescribed form online. Necessary No Objection 
 
Certificate may kindly be forwarded to the Secretary, FPSC, Islamabad within one month 
 
upto _______________________.  
2. 
I claimed my particulars and Employment Record in my Application Form as under:— 
(a) 
Name of officer: 
(b) 
CNIC No:  
Contact#  
(c) 
Father's Name:  
(d) 
Date of Birth :  
(e) 
Date of Entry into Government Service:  
(f) 
Date of Entry into PMS/PCS  
(g) 
Present Designation & BS:  
Office Ph.#  
(h) 
Place of Domicile: ( District)  
(i) 
Office Address:  
 
3.  
Service Record: Year of Qualifying PMS/PCS through respective Public Service 
Commission of Province/Region_______________ Date of Appointment in BS-17___________ 
Present BPS_______ Date of Promotion to Present Pay Scale____________ Present Post held 
________________________ Department ______________ Total Period of Service in BPS-17 and 
above____________ .  
4.  
Posts Held in BPS-17 and above: 
Post Held 
BPS 
From 
To 
Department 
Cadre or          
Ex-Cadre Post 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Date:____________ (Applicant‘s signature)  
 
 
          (Continued overleaf…) 

Page -230                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
PART-II 
 
TO BE FILLED/VERIFIED BY TIIE DEPARTMENT/ EMPWYER OF THE CANDIDATE 
 
The Secretary (Service) of respective Provincial/Regional Government must process this certificate in the 
light of FPSC Advertisement and forward or communicate the refusal as the case may be, to FPSC within 
one month from the closing date. On selection, the department will have to relieve the official for joining the 
post.  
 
Important Note 
 
This certificate must be processed on Personal File of the applicant/ 
employee.  
 
The employment record must be checked and verified/ confirmed to fall in 
line with the Eligibility Criteria. 
 
(i) Personal file No._______________________ (ii) Date of Birth __________________________  
(iii) Date of entry into Government Service with Basic Scale: ______________________________  
(iv) Date of Entry into PMS/PCS through respective Public Service Commission   _____________ 
v) Present Designation with BS: ______________ (vi) Total Continuous Govt. Service: _________   
(vii) Availed Extra-Ordinary Leave (Y.M.D)  _________ (viii) Accepted Domicile at time:_____ 
       of entry into Govt. Service  
(ix) Date of Promotion in BPS-18:  _________ (x) Date of Promotion in BS-19 ________________ 
(xi) Total Length of Service ___________________. 
5.  
Last 5 years PERs Grading to be filled and certified by Provincial S & GAD:  
 
Period 
Pay Scale 
Overall 
Grading 
Pen Picture by 
RO 
Remarks of 
CSO 
From 
To 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6. 
It is certified that, the applicant with particulars as above has a minimum Blood count of 
75% and at least 3 ―very good‖ Performance Evaluation Reports (PERs), with no average PER, in 
the five years immediately preceding the year in which application for the FPSC examination is made: 
No minor and major penalty has been imposed on him nor has he/she been convicted by any court of 
Law during the last 05 years. No Inquiry / Disciplinary Proceedings under respective Efficiency and 
Discipline Rules of Provincial/ Regional governments or Inquiry / trial under Accountability Ordinance 
or proceedings in any court of Law are pending against him/her presently.  
7. 
In case it is decided to forward a case where adverse entries do exist in his/her records, 
extracts of the adverse entries from the relevant PERs should be enclosed for information of the 
Commission. Also confirm that the adverse remarks were communicated to the official and no 
appeal/petition -is pending for decision thereon.  
8. 
It is certified that on selection of Mr. _________ for induction in Pakistan Administrative 
Services, the Government of __________will have no objection to relieve him to join the post 
under the Federal Government.  

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -231 
 
 
9. 
It is certified that this certificate has been processed on personal file of the officer and 
employment record has been checked and found correct as given above.  
Signature: ______________________   
Name: _________________________ 
Countersignature of Chief Secretary  
                                Designating: Secretary (Services)  
    
 
 
 
  
            
Services & General Administration Department  
(Official Seal)  
 
 
 
 
Government:____________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page -232                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
Annex-B 
FEDERAL PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION 
 
PERSONAL BIO DATE FORM 
(FOR INDUCTION OF OFFICERS OF PMS/PCS INTO PAS 
(Under Provincial Management Services (PMS)/ 
Provincial Civil Services (PCS), Induction into Pakistan Administrative Service  
(PAS) Rules, 2020) 
 
0 l.  
Roll No: ______(To be allotted by the FPSC) Personal No: ________  
02.  
Present Pay Scale: ____________  
03.  
Name: ______________  
04. 
Father's Name:___________  
05.  
Domicile (Self):__________  06.  
Province: _______________  
07.  
Date of Birth: ___________   Day ____ Month _______ Year _____ 
08.  
Place of Birth/City (Self): ______________  
09.  
Marital status: (Please mark only one put a tick mark ( ) in the relevant box)  
Single            
 
Married        
  Divorced/Widow   
10.  
CNIC: ___________________________  
11.  
Religion: (Please put a cross in relevant box)  
Muslim   
                  Non Muslim  
 
12 
Particulars of the spouse (if married):  
 
Name _______________ CNIC _______________ Nationality ____________________  
 
Age: _____ Education: ______Occupation:_______ Present Designation: ____________  
13.  
Details of Children:  
 
S. No 
Name of the Child 
Age (Years) 
Present Occupation 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
 
 
 
(d) 
 
 
 
(e) 
 
 
 
Photograph 
(05) 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -233 
 
 
14.  
Particulars of parents:  
         
       
         Father   
                          Mother  
(a) Place of birth:   
 
 
________________ 
________________ 
(b) Date of birth:   
 
 
________________ 
________________ 
(c) Date of death, if not alive:  
 
________________ 
________________ 
(d) Your age at his/ her death:  
 
________________ 
________________ 
(c) Education (highest degree/class Passed):  
________________ 
________________ 
(f) Profession  
 
 
 
________________ 
________________ 
(g) Designation:  
 
 
 
________________ 
________________ 
(h):   
 
 
 
 
________________ 
________________ 
 
15.  
Give particulars of Brothers (B) and Sisters (S) in order of birth:  
 
S. No  
Name  
Relationship  
Age  
Education  
Present  
Occupation  
(a)  
 
 
 
 
 
(b) 
 
 
 
 
 
(c) 
 
 
 
 
 
(d) 
 
 
 
 
 
(e) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16.  
Close relations in Civil Service:  
 
S. No  
Name  
Relationship  
Age  
Present Pay 
Scale 
 
Post presently 
held 
 
(a)  
 
 
 
 
 
(b) 
 
 
 
 
 
(c) 
 
 
 
 
 
(d) 
 
 
 
 
 
(e) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17.  
Details of Immovable property (parents, Self and Family):  
 
S. No  Identification & nature of Assets(s) Mode of acquisition/year Cost of acquisition  
(a)  
 
 
 
(b) 
 
 
 
(c) 
 
 
 
(d) 
 
 
 
(e) 
 
 
 
 
18.  
Annual Income of family Rs. _______ Number of Dependents _______  
 
 

Page -234                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
19.  
Academic Qualifications:  
 
S.  
No 
Education 
Institution 
attended 
Year 
Grade/Div. 
Marks 
Obtained 
Board/ 
University 
Main 
Subjects 
(a)  
Matric  
(b)  
Intermediate  
(c)  
B.A/B.Sc.  
(d)  
M.A/M.Sc.  
(e)  
M. Phil/M.S.  
(f) 
 Ph. D 
  (g) 
Other  
 
20.  
Additional Qualifications/Trainings: 
 
S. No  
Nature of Training  
Agency/Organization  
Grade/Div  Duration  
Year  
(a)  
 
 
 
 
 
(b)  
 
 
 
 
 
(c)  
 
 
 
 
 
(d)  
 
 
 
 
 
(e) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21. 
Special Courses (if any):  
 
S. No  
Name of Course 
Year 
Institution  
(a)  
 
 
 
(b)  
 
 
 
(c)  
 
 
 
(d)  
 
 
 
(e) 
 
 
 
 
22.  
Languages (Excellent, Good, Fair):  
 
S. No 
Language 
Read 
Write 
Speak 
(a)  
 
 
 
 
(b)  
 
 
 
 
(c)  
 
 
 
(d) 
 
 
 
 
23. 
Social/ Literary interest:  
24. 
Sports/Achievement (with year): 
25. 
Hobbies:  
26. 
Publications (if any) with title, journal, date of publication.  

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -235 
 
 
27.  
Travel Abroad:  
 
S. No  Countries  
Period (Days)  
Purpose  
(a)  
 
 
 
(b)  
 
 
 
(c)  
 
 
 
(d) 
 
 
 
(e) 
 
 
 
 
28. 
Postal Address:   _____________________________   
(in capital letters)  
 
29. 
Permanent Address: ________________________________________ 
 
(if different from above)  
 
30. 
Telephone Number (if any) with City Code:  
 
 
Office:  
__________Residence: _____________ Mobile: ___________  
 
31.  
Miscellaneous: (Any other information)  
 
32.  
Service Record: Year of Qualifying PMS/PCS through respective Public Service 
Commission of Province/Region __________ Date of Appointment in    BS-17__________ Present 
BPS _________ Date of Promotion to Present Pay Scale_______ Present Post held _____________ 
Department ______________ Total Period of Service in BPS-I 7 and above _________________. 
   
33.  
Posts Held In BPS-17 and above:  
 
Post held 
BPS 
From 
To 
Department 
Cadre or Ex-
Cadre Post 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34. 
Declaration:  
(i) 
I Certify that the statements I have made in this application are true to the best 
 
of my knowledge and belief. I understand that if any of the above statement is 
 
false in any material respect or omit any material information relevant to my 

Page -236                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
 
previous examination, service, etc. my application is liable to be rejected and 
 
appointment is liable to be terminated.  
(ii) 
I hereby further declare that I have never been involved in any criminal/civil/ 
disciplinary case or prosecuted in any criminal / civil or quasi-judicial proceedings 
involving moral turpitude (If involved, please give detailed particulars of the 
incident with name of police station and nature of offence). 
(iii) 
I have read and understood ―Provincial Management Services (PMS)/Provincial 
Civil Services (PCS). Induction into Pakistan Administrative Service (PAS) 
Rules,2020‖ before filling this application form and agree to abide by them, in 
totality & unconditionally.  
35.  
Certified that I have filled in Part-I of NOC (Annex-A) and furnished the same to Secretary 
Services for verification/authentication and countersigning by Chief Secretary and onward 
submission to Secretary. Federal Public Service Commission, Islamabad within one month.  
 
 
 
 
Signature: _______________ 
Date: ______________  
  
 
               Name of the Officer: _______________  
                                                                                                                                 (in Capital letters)  
_________________________________________________________________ 
[No.  
 
 
] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       ( 
                      ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -237 
 
 
GUIDELINES OF SYLLABUS FOR INDUCTION OF PMS/PCS OFFICERS 
INTO PAS 
 
S. R. O. 275(I)/2021.-In exercise of the powers conferred under Section 7-A of 
the Federal Public Service Commission Ordinance, 1977 read with sub-rule (2) of rule 7 
of the Civil Service of Pakistan (Composition and Cadre) Rules, 1954, and with approval 
of the Federal Government, the Chairman of the Commission is pleased to make 
following Guidelines for the Syllabus of Competitive Examination for Induction of 
Provincial Management Services (PMS)/Provincial Civil Services (PCS), into Pakistan 
Administrative · Service (PAS) under related Rules, 2020.  
 
1.  
Examination will comprise of:  
(i)  
Written Examination   
-300 Marks 
(ii)  
Viva Voce  
 
 
-100 Marks 
 
2. 
Written Examination:- Will be of 300 marks with breakdown as under:  
 
 
(i)  
Paper- I, Analytical Abilities (100 Marks): Quantitative Reasoning 
(50) and Verbal Reasoning (50) on the lines of GRE.  
 
(ii)  Paper- II, Essay (50 Marks): An essay of 1200 to 1500 words on 
given topics.  
 
(iii)  Paper – III Analysis Paper (50 Marks): An analysis paper on given 
theme will be required with plausible conclusions and workable 
recommendations as outcomes.  
 
(iv)  Paper - IV, Objective Type / MCQs (100 Marks): comprising 
MCQs on Economy, Current Affairs, Pakistan Affairs and Public 
Policy & Governance.  
Paper- I, Analytical Abilities (100 Marks)  
a. 
Quantitative Reasoning (50%)  
 
understand, interpret and analyze quantitative information  
 
solve problems using mathematical models 
 
apply basic skills and elementary concepts of arithmetic, 
algebra, geometry and data analysis  
b. 
Verbal Reasoning (50%)  
 
Analyze and draw conclusions from discourse; reason  from 
incomplete data; identify author's assumptions and/or perspec-
tive; understand multiple levels of meaning, such as literal, 
figurative and author's intent  

Page -238                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
 
select important points; distinguish major from minor or relevant 
points; summarize text; understand the structure of a text  
 
understand the meanings of words, sentences and entire texts; 
understand relationships among words and among concepts  
c. 
Analytical Writing is covered under Essay as separate paper.  
Suggested Readings  
GRE The Official Guide to the Revised General Test (Latest Edition) Barron's 
GRE, Latest Edition, Sharon Weiner Green M.A.  
Paper - II, Essay (50 Marks)  
50 Marks comprising Essay of 1200-1500 words on given topics focusing on 
analysis.  
 
A wide choice of topics relating to social, political, development, security, 
economic and international affairs will be given. Officers are expected to 
reflect comprehensive and reach based knowledge on a selected topic, 
arrange their ideas in orderly fashion and to write concisely. Candidate's 
articulation, effective and exact expression and technical treatment of the 
style of English Essay writing will be given credit. The focus shall be on:  
 
articulate complex ideas clearly and effectively  
 
support ideas with relevant reasons and examples  
 
examine claims and accompanying evidence  
 
sustain a well-focused, coherent discussion 
 
control the elements of standard written English 
Suggested Readings 
 
Title  
Author 
Practical English. Usage  
M. Swan (Oxford University Press).  
A University English Grammar  
R. Quirk & s. Greenbaum (ELBS; Longmans)  
Write Better, Speak Better  
Readers Digest Association.  
Modern English in Action  
Henry Christ (D.C Heath & Co.)  
 
Paper - III, Analysis Paper (50 Marks)  
An analysis of given Theme containing brief situation and information will be 
required. Emphasis will be on soliciting practical recommendations based on 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -239 
 
 
sound conclusions. Analysis of situations as faced in Public Administration 
related to PAS shall be focused at. Any famous known previously experienced 
situation may also be included.  
Paper- IV, Objective Type/MCQs (100 Marks)  
100 Marks, comprising MCQs on Public Policy, Governance & Administration 
(35%). Economy of Pakistan (30%). Current and Pakistan Affairs (35%). Broad 
contours shall be as following:  
Public Policy, Governance & Administration (35%) 
I. 
Basic Concepts of Governance: Origin of the Governance, good 
governance and effective governance; Characteristics of good governance: 
Participation, Rule of law, Transparency, Responsiveness, Equity, 
Effectiveness and Efficiency, Accountability, Strategic Vision, Failure of 
Governance: its indicators diagnostic tools & Effects.  
II. 
Governance Theories: Communitarianism; Decentered Theory; Libertar-
ian Socialism; Institutionalism; Marxism; Neoliberalism; Rational Choice 
Theory; Regulation Theory. 
III. 
Governance Indicators: laid down by World Bank/IMF/ UNESCO/ 
UNDP/ADB, their explanation & application in Pakistan Transparency 
and Accountability; Political Stability and Absence of Violence; 
Government' Effectiveness; Regulatory Authorities & their quality of 
service; Rule of Law; Control of Corruption.  
IV. 
Public Policy and planning Institutions and their role in Planning: 
Institutional Framework for Policy Coordination and Planning (ECNEC, 
Economic Coordination Committees of the Cabinet, The Federal Cabinet, 
The Secretaries Committee, Minister's Secretariat, The Planning 
Commission, The Finance Division, The Cabinet Division, and all Federal 
Ministries for their respective subject); Role of Planning Commission in 
Policy and Planning; Strategic Planning in Federal: Provincial 
Government and Local Government; Role of International Donors in 
Policy Formulation (IMF Document ―Memorandum on Economic and 
Financial Policies 2013/14-2015/16‖ that underpins almost all public 
policies.); Public Policy and implementation in Key Sectors (i.e., Health, 
Education).  
V. 
Accountability: Introduction to Accountability and its concepts 
(Standards, Symbolism, regional and country-wide comparisons, a Review 
of 
Contemporary 
Studies); 
Types 
of 
Accountability 
Political 
Accountability, Legal/Judicial Accountability, Administration Accountab-
ility, Professional Accountability, Private vs. Public Accountability; 
National Strategies against Corruption and remedial measure.  
VI. 
Bureaucracy: Introduction to the Concept of Bureaucracy (History, 
Theories of Bureaucracy (Max Weber, Marx, John Steward Mill, 
Woodrow Wilson) Role of Bureaucracy in Pakistan British Legacy, civil-
military relations, neutrality, dilution of degradation, political allegiance, 

Page -240                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
power. Public Administration and Code of Ethics (Effectiveness of the 
Estacode and the Code of Ethics, Comparison with other countries).  
VII. Public Policy Formulation and Implementation: The Policy Making 
Process: How Policies are Made (Six stages including diagnosis with 
cautions to be exercised at each stage); Policy Implementation & Role of 
Bureaucracy (Training, Pervasive Inertia and resources, Political 
interference, Ability to say ―No.‖); Policy· Analysis, The Quest for 
Solutions (Lack of research in policy analysis, Lack of coordination 
among departments, secrecy, openness); Policy Evaluation; Assessing The 
Impact of Public Policy, Program Evaluation; Success and failure of 
Government.  
VIII. Multi-level Governance in Pakistan:  
 
Legislature: National Assembly, Senate, Provincial Assemblies, 
Standing Committees, Public Accounts Committees:  
 
Judiciary: Supreme Court, High Courts, Lower Courts, judicial 
review, judicial activism.  
 
Federal, Provincial Cabinets and Federal Ombudsman.  
 
Council of Common Interests, National Economic Council, 
Economic Committee of the Cabinet, Executive Committee of 
the National Economic Council, National Finance Commission, 
Cabinet Committee on Privatization, Cabinet Committees, Public-
Private Sector Committees on Economy, Tax Reform.  
 
Functioning of the offices and lateral interference in decision 
making: President of Pakistan; Prime Minister of Pakistan; Office of 
Governor, Office of Chief Minister.  
 
Local Government system under the latest local Government Acts: 
District Government, Tehsil Government, Union Administration, Its 
Efficiency, Performance & Causes of Success or Failure.  
IX. 
Federalism, Devolution and Decentralization: Constituents participation in 
Federal Structure; Principle of Subsidiary in Public Service Delivery; 
Decentralization Models. 
X. 
Role of Citizens in Governance and channels for factoring their voice.  
XI. 
Good Governance in Islam: Quranic Guidance on Good Governance; 
Concept of Governance and its application in light of Quran; Sunnah and 
Fiqh. 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -241 
 
 
SUGGESTION READINGS 
Titles  
Author  
Governance  
Ane Mette Kjaer  
Encyclopedia of Governance, Volume 2  
Mark Bevir  
Implementing Public Policy: Governance in  
Theory and in Practice,  
Hill M. and Hupe P.  
Accountability: Managing for Maximum Results  
Sam R LLyod 
Guidance for Good Governance:  
Explorations in Quranic, Scientific & Cross-Cultural 
Approaches  
Abdullah Ahsan & Stephen 
Bonsalyound 
How Governments Work  
Muzaffar A. Ghaffaar 
Government and Administration in Pakistan  
Dr. Jamil-ur-Rehman 
Public Administration With Special Reference To Pakistan 
Dr. Sultan Khan 
Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan  
National Assembly 
Pakistan: Beyond the Crisis State  
Maleeha Lodhi 
Power Dynamics, Institutional Instability and Economics 
Growth: The Case of Pakistan  
Akmal Hussain 
Federalism and Rights  
Ellis Katz and G Allan Tarr 
Local Government Reforms in Pakistan: Context, Content 
and Causes  
Ali Cheema, Asim Ijaz 
Khawaja and Adnan Qadir 
Economics Democracy Through Pro Poor Growth  
Ponna Wignaraja, Akaml 
Hussian Susil Sirivardana 
Governance: South Asian Perspective  
Hasnat Abdul Hye 
Governance, Economic Policy and Reform in Pakistan  
Abdus Samad 
''Pakistan-Problems of Governance,‖ 1993  
Hussain, M., Hussain. A. 
―Pakistan's Predicament: The Diagnostic and the Deputes 
within,‖ Journal of Pakistan Vision, 13/1(2012).  
Racine, Jean-Luc. 
The Culture of power and Governance of Pakistan-1947-
2008, Oxford, 2010  
Niaz, I. 
―Legitimacy and the Administration State: Ontology, 
History, and Democracy,‖ Public Administration 
Quarterly, UC Berkeley, 2013  
Bevir, M., 
Handbook of Public Policy Analysis  
Frank Fischer, Gerald J. 
Miller, and Mara S. Sidney 
Public Policy : Politics, Analysis, and Alternatives, 44th 
Ed., CQ Press, 2012  
Kraft, Michael E., Scott R. 
Furlong 
Public Policy in An Uncertain World: Analysis Decisions, 
Harvard, 2013  
 
Economy of Pakistan (30%)  

Page -242                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
i. 
Definition and Measurement of Development: Characteristics of under 
development, rethinking on the concept of development: Growth vs. 
Redistributive justice, Absolute and Relative Poverty, Basic Needs 
Approach, Sustainable Development, Environmental Degradation & other 
Issues.  
ii. 
Planning Experience of Pakistan: A critical evaluation of the strategy of 
economic planning, growth and governance institutions. Strategic 
Planning and Management; Planning Process; Policy Analysis; Policy 
Implementation; Program Evaluation; Planning Machinery; Role of 
Donors and International Institutions in Public Policy and Management; 
Policy making and implementation of Federal Government of Pakistan.  
iii. Agricultural Development in Pakistan: Changes in Agricultural Policies 
over plan periods, Major Monetary and Fiscal measures to promote 
Agricultural development, Green Revolution Strategy and its implications 
for growth and redistribution, Land Reforms and changes in the Tenure 
System 1950-1980, Subsidies to agriculture sector, Issues and Challenges 
facing agriculture sector in Pakistan, Cooperative and Corporate Farming, 
Rural Development.  
iv. 
Industrial Development in Pakistan: Early industrialization strategy, 
Creation of Financial and Development Institutions, Major monetary and 
fiscal measures to promote industrial development, changing role of public 
sector over the plan periods, Evaluation of Nationalization Policy, 
Concentration of industrial income and wealth, Evaluation of Import 
Substitution Policy and Export led Growth Strategy in Pakistan. Issues and 
challenges facing industrial sector in Pakistan.  
v. 
Role of Foreign Trade and Aid in Economic Development:  
Pakistan's Balance of Payments, Terms of International Trade, Changes in 
direction of trade, Trends in Pakistan's major exports and imports and 
issues facing export sector, Causes of significant changes in the trends, 
role of migration and remittances· in Pakistan's economy, costs and 
benefits of Foreign Aid, Role of Foreign Direct Investment.  
vi. 
Privatization, Denationalization, Deregulation: Conceptual and operati-
onal aspects, International comparisons, globalization and its impact on 
flow of capital, labour and sovereignty, Pakistan's Experience of 
Privatization, regulatory bodies and their effectiveness.  
vii. Energy Sector of Pakistan: A comprehensive evaluation of energy sector 
of Pakistan including ·energy mix, power sector, oil and gas sector. 
management of power generation and distribution, Independent Power 
Producers experience in Pakistan, Energy reserves and Potential in 
Pakistan, Energy and power and gas exploration; Policies, regulatory 
bodies, issues and challenges facing energy sector.  

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -243 
 
 
viii. Social Sector Development in Pakistan: Education, Health, Sanitation, 
Demographic dividend, poverty, various indices including Global Multiple 
Poverty Index.  
ix. 
Taxation system of Pakistan 
x. 
Major Issues in Pakistan Economy: Challenges facing the economy, 
Energy crisis, Corruption, External debt accumulation and dependency, 
Un-employment, Income inquiry, Inflation, Fiscal and trade deficits, 
Balance of payment issues, Water Issues. 
 
SUGGESTION READINGS 
 
Title 
Author 
Economic Development  
Todaro, M.P. 
 
Under Development and Agrarian Structure in 
Pakistan  
Khan, Mahmood Hassan 
Factor in Economic Development  
Cairncross, A.K 
 
Foreign Aid Theory and Practice in Southern 
Asia  
Wolf, Jr. DC 
Government Finance-An Economic Analysis  
Due John, F. 
 
Introduction to International Economics  
Snider, D.A, Paul Krugman, Donimich 
Salvatore 
Studies on Economic Development with Special 
Reference to Pakistan  
Ghouse, A. 
History of International Trade  
Findlay, R and O, Rourke, K 
Economic Survey of Pakistan  
Government Publication 
 
Reports of the State Bank of Pakistan  
State Bank of Pakistan 
Poverty Reduction Strategy papers  
Finance Division 
Annual Plans  
Planning Commission 
Foreign Aid Theory and Practice in Southern 
Asia  
Wolf, Jr. Dc 
Government Finance-An Economic Analysis  
Due John, F. 
 
Current Affairs (35%)  
(i) Pakistan's relations with China, Russia, Saud Arabia, Indonesia, Turkey  
(ii) Pakistan's relations with the United States  
(iii) Pakistan's relations with International Organizations: UN, OIC, WTO, 
Common Wealth, CAREC, ASEAN  

Page -244                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
(iv) Security Council, World Bank and IMF Reforms  
(v) Global financial Crisis and International Economy  
(vi) Environment: Global Warming, Hugo Framework of Action, Sendai 
Framework  
(vii) Millennium Development Goals  
(viii) Global Energy Politics  
(ix) Nuclear politics in South Asia and Role of Pakistan  
(x) International Trade; Doha Development Round and Bali Plan of Action 
Package, Current issues in WTO, New Silk Route, Politics of FTAs/PTAs, 
MFN Status  
(xi) Cooperation and Competition in Arabian Sea, Indian and Pacific Oceans and 
South China Sea including Arc of Democracy, Stings of Pearls, Trans-Pacific 
Partnership Treaty, Regional Economic Cooperation Plan  
(xii) European Union: Challenges and Prospects and effect of Transatlantic Trade 
and Investment Treaty  
(xiii) Globalization, liberation and erosion of sovereignty  
SUGGESTION READINGS 
.  
. .  
Title 
Author 
Federalism 
and 
Ethnic 
Conflict 
Regulation in India and Pakistan  
Adeney, Katharian,. New York: Pal Grave 
2007 
Labor, 
Democratization 
and 
Development in India and Pakistan 
Candland, Christopher, NY: Routledge, 
2007 
Perception, Politics and Security in 
South Asia: The Compound Crisis in 
1990  
Chari, P.R., New York: Rutledge,2003 
The Future of Pakistan  
Cohen Stephen P. Et at. Washington: 
Brookings Institute Press, 2001 
Frontline Pakistan: The Struggle with 
Militants Islam  
Hussain, Zahid. New York: I.B Tauris, 
2007 
Conflict Between India and Pakistan: 
an Encyclopedia.  
Lyon, Peter. California: ABC- CLIO, 2008 
Back to Pakistan: A Fifty Year Journey  Mass, Leslie Noyes. Playmouth: Rowman 
& Little Fiedld Publishers,20l1 
Judging the State: Courts and Constitut-
ional Politics in Pakistan  
Newberg, Paula R. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 1995 
Pakistan: Manifest Destiny.  
Qureshi, Atiff. London: Epic Press 2009 
 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -245 
 
 
[Authority.— Federal Public Service Commission‘s Notification S.R.O No. 274(I)/2021 dated            
23rd February,2021] 
Title 
Author 
Pakistan, America, and the Future of 
Global Jihad  
Riedel, 
Bruce. 
Deadly 
Embrace: 
Washington: Brookings Institute Press, 2011 
Kashmir in Conflict: India, Pakistan 
and the Unending War  
Schofield, Victoria. New York: I.B. Tauria, 
Islamic Law and the Law of Armed 
Conflict:The Armed Conflict in Pakistan  
Shah, Niaz A. New York: Routledge, 2011 
Making Sense of Pakistan  
Shaikh, Farzana, New York: Colombia 
University Press, 2009 
A Brief History of Pakistan  
Wynbrandt, James. New York: InfoBase 
Publishing, 2009 
Powering Pakistan: Meetings Pakistan 
Energy Needs in 21st Century  
 Robert 
M. 
Hathaway 
and 
Michael 
Gugelman 
Pakistan‘s Energy Sector: From Crisis 
to Crisis-Breaking Chain  
Zaid Alahdad 
Pakistan Foreign Policy 1947-2005: A 
Concise History, 2011 
Abdul Sattar, 
Issue in Pakistan 's Economy, 2010  
Akbar S. Zaidi 
Pakistan: A Hard Country, 2012 
Anatolleven 
Government & Politics in South Asia,  
6th ed., 2009  
Baxter, Malik, Kennedy & Oberst 
Introduction to International Politics 
Economy, 2010  
David Balaam & Brandford Dillman . . . 
International Organization (Second 
Edition) 2012  
Volker Rittberger, Bernhard Zangl and 
Andress Kruck  
The Age of Deception: Nuclear 
Diplomacy in Treacherous Times  
Mohamed Elbaradei, 2011  
International Relations, 2012  
Joshua Goldstein  
World 
Politics: 
Trends 
& 
Transformation, 2011  
Kegley & Blanton   
Pakistan Beyond the Crisis, 2011  
Maleeha Lodhi  
Globalization in Questions, 2009  
Paul Hirst  
Omtermatopma; Political Economy: 
Interests & Institutions in the Global 
 Thomas Oately 
Politics and Change in the Middle 
East,   10th Ed., Pearson, 2012  
Andersen, Seibert, and Wagnber  
Eating Grass: The Making of the 
Pakistani Bomb, (2012)  
Feroz Khan  

Page -246                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
VII. FEDERAL PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION 
7.1 
Federal Public Service Commission  
Ordinance,1977 (No. XLV of 1977) 
 
WHEREAS it is expedient to repeal and, with certain modifications, re-enact the 
Federal Public Service Commission Act, 1973 (LXVI of 1973); 
 
AND WHEREAS the President is satisfied that circumstances exist which 
render it necessary to take immediate action; 
 
NOW, THEREFORE, in pursuance of the proclamation of the fifth day of July, 
1977, read with the Laws (Continuance in Force) Order, 1977 (CMLA Order No.1 of 
1977), and in exercise of all powers enabling him in that behalf, the President is pleased 
to make and promulgate the following Ordinance:— 
 
1. 
Short title and commencement.— 
(1)  
This Ordinance may be called the Federal Public Service Commission 
Ordinance, 1977. 
(2) 
It shall come into force at once. 
 
2. 
Definitions.— In this Ordinance, unless there is anything repugnant in the 
subject or context:— 
(a) 
―Commission‖ means the Federal Public Service Commission; and 
(b) 
―Member‖ means a member of the Commission and includes the 
Chairman thereof. 
 
3. 
Composition of Commission, etc. 
(1)  There shall be a Federal Public Service Commission. 
(2)  The President shall by regulations determine:- 
(a)  
the number of members of the Commission and their conditions of 
service; and 
(b) 
the number of members of the staff of the Commission and their 
conditions of service: 
Provided that the salary, allowances and privileges of a 
member of the Commission shall not be varied to his disadvantage 
during his term of office. 
 
(3)  The Chairman and other members of the Commission shall be appointed 
by the President. 
*(4). 
The Commission shall have: 
(a) 
 not less than one half of the members who shall be persons having  
 held office in the service of Pakistan in basic pay scale 21 or above  
 post: 
                                                          
*Substituted vide FPSC (Amendment) Ordinance 56 of 2000, s.s.2 to 5, dated 17-11-2000. 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -247 
 
 
Provided that no serving Government servant shall be appoint-
ted as a member; 
(b) 
at least one member each from; 
(i) 
retired judges of the superior judiciary; 
(ii) 
retired officers not below the rank of Major-General or 
equivalent of the Armed Forces; and 
(iii) women and the private sector possessing such qualifications 
and experience as the Federal Government may by rules 
prescribe. 
 
*[(5). No proceedings or act of the Commission shall be invalid merely on the 
ground of the existence of a vacancy in, or a defect in the constitution of the 
Commission.] 
 
4. 
Term of office of members, etc. 
 
[(1)  A member of the Commission shall hold office for a term of three years 
from the date on which he enters upon office or till he attains the age of sixty-five years 
whichever is earlier; 
 
Provided that a member of the Commission who is a retired Judge of the 
Supreme Court or a High Court shall hold office for a term of three years within five 
years from the date of his retirement; 
 
Provided further that a member of the Commission shall not be eligible for re-
appointment. 
(1A) Notwithstanding anything in any contract, agreement or any instrument 
containing terms and conditions of the service, a member who, on or after the commence-
ment of the Federal Public Service Commission (Amendment) Act, 2006, completes his 
tenure or attains upper age-limit specified in sub-section (1) shall on such commencement 
forthwith cease to be member as defined in clause (b) of section 2.] 
(2) 
A member may resign his office by writing under his hand addressed to 
the President. 
 
[4A. Oath of office. 
 
Before entering upon office the Chairman and a member shall take oath in the 
form set out in the Schedule to this Ordinance before the President in case of Chairman 
and before the Chairman in case of a member.] 
 
5. 
Ineligibility for further employment. 
 
On ceasing to hold office, a member shall not be eligible for further employment 
in the service of Pakistan. 
                                                          
* Ins. and shall be deemed always to have been so ins. vide FPSC (Amdt.) Ordinance,1978 (25 of 1978) s.2. 
 Subs. vide FPSC (Amdt.) Act,2006 (v of 06) s.2 and shall be deemed to have been substituted.  
 Amended vide FPSC (Amendment) Ordinance 2000 (56 of 2000) s.s. 2 to 5. 

Page -248                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
 
[5A. 
Appointment of a serving member as a Chairman. 
 
A serving member of the Commission shall be eligible for appointment as 
Chairman for a term not exceeding the unexpired portion of his term as such member.] 
 
6. 
Removal from office. 
 
A member shall not be removed from office except in the manner applicable to a Judge of 
a High Court. 
 
7. 
Functions of the Commission. 
 
(1)   The functions of the Commission shall be:— 
(a) 
to conduct tests and examinations for recruitment of persons 
 
to All-Pakistan Services, the civil services of the Federation and 
 
civil posts in connection with the affairs of the Federation in basic 
 
pay scales 16 and above or equivalent;‖ 
 
**(1a) 
The recruitment to the posts in basic pay scales 11 to 15 made 
by any authority or person on or after the 28th May 2003, other 
than through the Commission, shall, notwithstanding any provision 
of this Ordinance or any other law, rule, notification or any order, 
decision of judgment of any court or forum, be deemed to be, and 
always to have been validly made, taken or done and shall not be 
called in question in any court or forum or any ground whatsoever. 
(b) 
to advise the President: 
 
(i) 
on matters relating to, qualifications for and method of 
 
recruitment to, services and posts referred to in clause (a); 
(ii) 
on the principles to be followed in making initial appoint-
 
ents to the services and posts referred to in clause(a) and in 
 
making appointments by promotion to posts in BPS 18 
 
and above and transfer from one service or occupational group 
 
to another; and  
(iii) 
on any other matter which the President may refer to the 
 
Commission; [and] 
***(c) 
to hold examinations for promotion for such posts as the Federal 
 
Government may, from time to time, by notification in the official 
 
Gazette, specify. 
 
 
Explanation.— 
 
In this section, ―recruitment‖ means initial appointment other than by 
promotion or transfer. 
                                                          
 Amended vide FPSC (Amendment) Ordinance 2000 (56 of 2000) s.s. 2 to 5. 
 Substituted vide Act No. X of 2005 , s.7 (w.e.f. 28-05-2003). 
 Substituted and Added vide Ordinance No. XLIX of 2002, dated 03-09-2002. 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -249 
 
 
 
(2) 
Recruitment to the following posts shall be outside the purview of the 
Commission:— 
(i) in the President‘s Secretariat; 
*[(ia) in the Directorate General of Inter Services Intelligence (ISI)]; 
  
(ii) 
filled by appointing a person on contract for a specified period [not 
exceeding two years]; 
(iii) filled on ad-hoc basis for a period of six months or less provided that– 
(1) 
no ad-hoc appointment shall be made before placing a requisition 
with the Commission for regular appointment; and 
(2)  before filling the post on ad-hoc basis, prior approval shall be 
obtained from the Commission; 
(iv) filled by re-employing a retired officer, provided that the re- employment 
is made for a specified period **[not exceeding two years] in a post not 
higher than the post in which the person was employed on regular basis 
before retirement; and 
(v) 
filled by the employment or re-employment of persons on the recommend-
ations of the High Powered Selection Board constituted by the President 
who are, or have been, Officers of the Armed Forces and hold, or have 
held, such posts therein as are declared by the President to be equivalent to 
the posts to be so filled.  
 
[(3) (a) A candidate aggrieved by any decision of the Federal Public Service 
Commission may, within thirty days of such decision, make a 
representation to the Commission and the Commission shall decide the 
representation within fifteen days after giving the candidate a 
reasonable opportunity of hearing. The decision of the Commission, 
subject to the result of review petition, shall be final. 
(b) A candidate aggrieved by the decision of the Commission made under 
paragraph (a) may, within fifteen days of the decision, submit a review 
petition to the Commission and the Commission shall decide the review 
petition within thirty days under intimation to the petitioner. 
(c) Save as provided in this Ordinance, no order made or proceeding taken 
under this Ordinance, or rules made thereunder, by the Commission 
shall be called in question in any court and no injunction shall be 
granted by any court in respect of any decision made or taken in 
pursuance of any power conferred by, or under, this Ordinance. 
 
(d) Any candidate aggrieved by a decision of the Commission under 
paragraph (b) may, within thirty days of the decision, prefer an appeal 
to the High Court.] 
                                                          
* Inserted vide Act No. XII of 2004 s.2 dated 16th December, 2004.  
Words ―not exceeding two years‖ were omitted vide Ordinance XLVI of 2007 s.2 and now stands restored 
w.e.f. 25-03-2010 on expiry of the Ordinance, please see clarification of Section 7(ii) & (iv). 
 Added vide FPSC (Amendment) Ordinance, 2001 dated 27-03-2001. 

Page -250                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
 
[7-A  Conduct of Business of Commission, etc.—The Chairman of the 
Commission may, with the approval of the Federal Government, make rules for 
regulating the conduct of the business of the Commission; and such rules may provide for 
any of the functions of the Commission specified by it being performed by a Committee 
composed of two or more members constituted by the Chairman for the purpose.] 
 
8. 
Commission to be informed when its advice not accepted.— Where the 
President does not accept the advice of the Commission, he shall inform the Commission 
accordingly. 
 
9. 
Reports of Commission.—(1) It shall be the duty of the Commission to 
present to the President annually a report on the work done by the Commission, and the 
President shall cause a copy of the report to be laid before the National Assembly and the 
Senate. 
 
(2) 
The report referred to in sub-section (1) shall be accompanied by a 
memorandum setting out so far as is known to the Commission:- 
(a) 
the cases, if any, in which the advice of the Commission was not accepted 
and the reasons thereof; and 
(b) 
the matter, if any, on which the Commission ought to have been consulted 
but was not consulted and the reasons thereof. 
 10. 
Rules.—The Federal Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Ordinance. 
 11. 
 [Repeal]. 
[SCHEDULE] 
     (See Section 4A) 
 
I, ___________________________________________ do solemnly swear that 
I will bear true faith and allegiance to Pakistan: 
 
That, as a Chairman (or Member) of the Federal Public Service Commission I will 
discharge my duties, and perform my functions, honestly, to the best of my ability and 
faithfully in accordance with the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and the law, 
and always in the interest of the solidarity, integrity, well-being and prosperity of Pakistan. 
 
That, I will not allow my personal interest to influence my official conduct or my 
official decisions and that in the performance of my functions, whether in the selection of 
persons for recruitment or appointment or in any other way, I will act without fear or favour, 
affection or ill will. 
 
May Allah Almighty help and guide me (A‘meen). 
President] 
[Authority.– FPSC‘s Ordinance No.F.24(1)/77-Pub.,dated 17-12-1977]. 
                                                          
 Ins. vide FPSC (Amdt.)Ordinance,1978 (25 of 1978), s.3. 
 Omitted vide Ordinance No.  XXVII of 1981, dated 08-07-1981. 
Added vide Federal Public Service Commission (Amendment) Ordinance No. LVI of 2000, s.3 dated                    
 17-11-2000. 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -251 
 
 
CLARIFICATION 
Clarification Regarding Amendment In Federal Public Service Commission 
Ordinance, 1977  
 
Section-7(2) (ii) & (iv) of the Federal Public Service Commission (FPSC) 
Ordinance, 1977 was amended vide FPSC (Amendment) Ordinance, 2007 and 
promulgated on 15-09-2007. Consequently, contract appointments and re-employments 
beyond two years were taken out of the purview of the Federal Public Service 
Commission.  
 
2. 
Supreme Court of Pakistan in its judgment, dated 31st July, 2009 had held 
that the ordinances promulgated by the President before 03-11-2007, which were given 
permanence by PCO(1)/2007 and also the Ordinances made and promulgated by the 
President between 03-11-2007 to 15-12-2007 (both days inclusive) which were also like 
wise given permanence through the same instrument, stood shorn of their purported 
permanence. The Supreme Court of Pakistan had observed that this Ordinance may be 
placed before the Parliament and allowed 120 days (period of validity) in terms of Article 
89 of the Constitution to commence from 31st day of July, 2009 for placement of such 
Ordinances before the Parliament. FPSC (Amendment) Ordinance, 2007 was re-
promulgated on 26th November, 2009 as FPSC (Amendment) Ordinance, 2009 (XLVII) 
of 2009), since it was difficult to get it passed from the National Assembly/Senate within 
120 days. The aforesaid Ordinance was placed before the National Assembly, however, it 
could not be passed till date.  
 
3. 
Since, the FPSC (Amendment) Ordinance, 2009 is still under process, the 
existing provision of Section 7(2) (ii) & (iv) have become ineffective and position prior 
to 15-09-2007 stand restored w.e.f 25-03-2010 on expiry of aforesaid Ordinance in terms 
of Article-89 of the Constitution of Pakistan. Consequently, contract appointment-
employment beyond two years made after 25-03-2010 now requires concurrence of 
Federal Public Service Commission. 
[Authority:- Establishment Division‘s U.O.No.3/2/2003-T.V dated 02-05-2012]. 
 
7.2 
Federal Public Service Commission (Composition  
and Condition of Service) Regulations, 1978 
In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (2) of Section-3 of the Federal 
Public Service Commission Ordinance, 1977 (XLV of 1977), the President is pleased to 
make the following regulations:— 
PART-I PRELIMINARY 
 
1.  
Short title.— These regulations may be called the Federal Public Service 
Commission (Composition and Condition of Service) Regulations, 1978. 
 
2. 
 Definitions.— In these regulations, unless there in anything repugnant in 
the subject or context.— 
(a) 
―Commission‖ means the Federal Public Service Commission and 
(b) 
―Member‖ means a Member of the Commission and, unless there is any-
thing repugnant in the subject or context, includes the Chairman thereof. 

Page -252                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
PART-II MEMBERS 
 
3. 
Composition.—The Commission shall consist of a Chairman and not more 
than eleven Members. 
 
Provided that if, at any time, by reason of an increase in the business of the 
Commission, or for any other reason, it becomes necessary to increase temporarily the 
number of Members, the President may appoint such number of additional members as 
appears to him to be necessary. 
 
4.  Pay, allowances and perquisites of the Chairman and Members.— The 
pay, allowances and perquisites of the Chairman and Members shall from the 1st day of 
January, 2013, be as set out in the Schedule-I to these regulations. 
 
  
   5. Omitted 
       6. Omitted 
       7. Omitted 
       8. Omitted 
 
9. 
Pension.— (1) No pension shall be attached to the office of a Member; and 
(2) 
A Member who is a re-employed retired government servant shall not be 
entitled to any pension or gratuity in respect of his service as Member; 
(3) 
A Member who was neither a government servant nor a retired 
government servant at the time of his appointment as Member shall be entitled to gratuity 
equal to one month‘s pay for each completed year of service as Member, subject to the 
gratuity not exceeding eight months pay. 
10. 
Other matters.— In respect of any matter which is not covered by these 
regulations, a Member shall be governed by the rules or orders applicable to officers of 
the corresponding @[grades] under government, or as may, in any particular case, be 
determined by the President. 
PART-III STAFF 
11. Staff.— The staff of the Commission shall be as set out in Schedule-II to 
these regulations. 
@@[12. Appointment of Secretary.— The Secretary shall be appointed from 
amongst serving government servants by the President, or a person authorized by him, in 
consultation with the Chairman.] 
                                                          
  Substituted vide Estt. Div.'s SRO 427/2000, dated 24th June, 2000. 
 Substituted vide Estt. Div.‘s S.R.O 70(I)/2013 dated 04-02-2013.  
 Omitted vide Estt. Div.‘s S.R.O 723(I)/2009 dated 11-08-2009 
@ BPS. 
@@ Substituted vide Estt. Div.'s SRO 427/2000, dated 24th June 2000. 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -253 
 
 
 13. Term of Office of Secretary.— The Secretary shall hold office ordinarily 
for a term of four years; but the President may extend the term, or curtail it, as the 
President may deem appropriate. 
14. 
Age of retirement of Secretary.— No person shall, unless the President 
otherwise directs, be appointed as Secretary, or continue to hold office as Secretary, after 
he has attained the age for the time being fixed for the retirement of government servants 
from service. 
15. 
Pay and allowances of Secretary.— The Secretary shall draw pay and 
allowances as admissible to him as a serving government servant. 
16. 
Appointment of Officers and Staff of the Commission.— The 
Chairman, or a person designated by him, shall be authority competent to make appoint-
ments to various posts of Officers and Staff of the Commission.  
17. Discipline and appeal, etc.— (1) The appointing authority under 
regulation-16 shall be the Authority under the *[Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) 
Rules, 2020,] for the Officers and Staff of the Commission. 
(2) 
An appeal shall lie to the Chairman against an order imposing a penalty 
passed by the ‗Authority‘ or the ‗Authorized Officer‘ other than the Chairman. 
(3) No appeal shall lie where a penalty is imposed by the Chairman but the 
aggrieved persons may apply for review of the order.  
(4) 
Every appeal or a review petition shall be submitted within a period of 
thirty days of the communication of the order against which appeal or, as the case may 
be, review petition is preferred. 
18. 
Terms and conditions of service of Officers and Staff.—(1) Subject to 
Federal Public Service Commission Ordinance, 1977 (XLV of 1977), or these regulat-
ions.— 
(i) 
the terms and conditions of the Secretary and other Officers and Staff of 
the Commission shall be the same as of civil servants in corresponding 
basic pay scales under Federal Government; and  
(ii) 
the Secretary and other officers and staff of the Commission shall be 
governed by the Civil Servants, 1973 (LXXI of 1973), and the rules made 
thereunder. 
(2) 
Any question arising as to which rules or orders are applicable to the case 
of any officers or member of Staff of the Commission shall be decided by the Chairman. 
[Authority: Establishment Division SRO No.1316(1)/78, dated 9.11.1979] 
                                                          
*Government Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules,1973 repealed with Civil Servants (Efficiency & 
Discipline) Rules,2020 . 

Page -254                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
*SCHEDULE-I 
[See Regulation 4] 
PAY, ALLOWANCES AND PERQUISITES OF CHAIRMAN AND MEMBERS 
S. 
No. 
Items 
Chairman 
Member 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
1. 
Pay per month.  
Rs. 425, 000 
Rs. 400,000 
2. 
Special FPSC allowance  per 
month  
Rs. 60,000 
Rs. 50,000 
3. 
Sumptuary  / Entertainment 
allowance per month.  
Rs. 6,000 
Rs. 5,000 
4. 
House rental ceiling allowance per 
month (if no free Government 
accommodation is provided)  
Rs. 75,000 
Rs. 62, 500 
5. 
Electricity and gas charges etc. per 
month  
Rs.22, 000 
Rs. 16,200 
6. 
Car  
Chauffer driven  1600 cc for 
official and private use  
Chauffer 
driven  
1300 cc for official 
and private use  
7. 
Telephone and mobile ceiling per 
month (office and residence)  
No Limit.  
No Limit.  
8. 
Internet ceiling per month 
(residence)  
No Limit.  
No Limit.  
9. 
Travelling Allowance, medical 
allowance and leave.  
As admissible to a Minister of 
State.  
As admissible to a 
Minister of State.  
10. 
Petrol per month.  
500 liters for official and 
private use.  
400 
liters 
for 
official and private 
use.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
* Substituted vide Estt. Div.‘s S.R.O.70(I)/2013 dated 4th February, 2013. 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -255 
 
 
* SCHEDULE II (See Regulation II) 
Number of Members of the staff of Federal Public Service Commission 
 
 
S.No.  Name of Post  
BPS 
No. of Posts 
1. 
Secretary  
22 
01 
2. 
Executive Director General  
21 
01 
3. 
Director General  
20 
03 
4. 
Director General (Research) 
20 
01 
5. 
Director General (Legal 
20 
01 
6. 
Chief Psychologist  
20 
01 
7. 
Chief. I.T.  
20 
01 
8. 
Director  
19 
08 
9. 
Director (Legal)  
19 
01 
10. 
Senior Psychologist  
19 
02 
11. 
 Director (Research)  
19 
01 
12. 
Director (Computer) 
19 
01 
13. 
Deputy Chief I.T  
19 
01 
14. 
Senior Private Secretary/Private Secretary 
19 
14 
15. 
Deputy Director  
18 
13 
16. 
Deputy Director (Legal) 
18 
01 
17. 
Psychologist  
18 
04 
18. 
Dy. Director (Research) 
18 
02 
19. 
System Analyst  
18 
01 
20. 
Programmer  
18 
01 
21. 
Database Administrator  
18 
01 
22. 
Quality Assurance Officer  
18 
01 
23. 
Junior Programmer  
17 
02 
24. 
Website Manager  
17 
01 
25. 
Network Administrator  
17 
01 
26. 
Data Control Officer  
17 
03 
27. 
Assistant Director (Research) 
17 
04 
28. 
Assistant Director  
17 
33 
29. 
Assistant Director (Legal) 
17 
03 
30. 
Librarian  
17 
01 
31. 
Transport Officer  
17 
01 
32. 
Superintendent (Record)  
17 
01 
33. 
Deputy Assistant Director 
16 
11 
34. 
System Operator  
16 
03 
                                                          
* Substituted vide Estt. Div.‘s S.R.O.70(I)/2013 dated 4th February, 2013. 

Page -256                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
S.No.  Name of Post  
BPS 
No. of Posts 
35. 
Computer Operator 
16 
01 
36. 
Assistant Database Administrator  
16 
01 
37. 
Hardware Engineer  
16 
01 
38. 
Assistant Network Administrator  
16 
05 
39. 
Data Processing Assistant  
16 
18 
40. 
Assistant Private Secretary 
16 
33 
41. 
Draftsman-cum-Artist 
16 
01 
42. 
Assistant Incharge  
15 
02 
43. 
Assistant 
14 
64 
44. 
Statistical  Assistant  
14 
06 
45. 
Stenotypist 
14 
49 
46. 
Security Superior  
14 
01 
47. 
Library Assistant  
14 
01 
48. 
Telephone Operator  
14 
02 
49. 
Data Entry Operator 
12 
17 
50. 
Upper Division Clerk  
09 
35 
51. 
Lower Division Clerk 
07 
63 
52. 
Security Clerk 
07 
02 
53. 
Driver  
04 
37 
54. 
Despatch Rider 
04 
02 
55. 
Duplicating Machine Operator 
04 
03 
56. 
Electrician  
04 
01 
57. 
Lift Operator  
03 
03 
58. 
Book Sorter  
02 
01 
59. 
Daftry  
02 
16 
60. 
Qasid  
02 
16 
61. 
Naib Qasid  
01 
77 
62. 
Frash  
01 
02 
63. 
Chowkidar 
01 
10 
64. 
Security Guard(Chowkidar) 
01 
09 
65. 
Buss Cleaner  
01 
01 
66. 
Khakroob  
01 
15 
Total 
620 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -257 
 
 
 
7.3 
Federal Public Service Commission  
(Functions) Rules, 1978  
 
In exercise of the powers conferred by section 10 of the Federal Public Service 
Commission Ordinance, 1977 (XLV of 1977), the Federal Government is pleased to 
make the following rules, namely:- 
 
1. 
These Rules may be called the Federal Public Service Commission 
(Functions) Rules, 1978. 
 
2. 
In these rules, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or 
context:— 
(a) 
―ad-hoc basis‖, when used with reference to an appointment, means 
appointment of a  person on temporary basis pending appointment of 
person nominated by the Commission; 
(b) 
―civil servant‖ means a person who is, or has been, a civil servant within 
the meaning of the Civil Servants Act, 1973 (LXVI of 1973); 
(c) 
* (Omitted); 
(d) 
―regular basis‖ when used with reference to an appointment other than an 
ad-hoc basis, or on contract, or on a temporary basis, for a specified 
period; 
(e) 
―retired officer‖ includes a retired officer of the Armed Forces; and 
(f) 
―test‖ includes written examination, interview and viva voce. 
 
**3. The Commission shall conduct tests and examinations for recruitment to 
all posts in connection with the affairs of the Federation in basic pay scale 16 and above 
or equivalent other than the posts.- 
(a) 
specified in the Schedule to these rules; 
(b) 
filled by appointing a person on contract for a specified period [not 
exceeding two years]; 
(c) 
filled on ad-hoc basis for a period of six months or less provided that.— 
(i) 
no ad-hoc appointment shall be made before placing a requisition 
with Commission for regular appointment; and 
(ii) 
before filling the post on ad-hoc basis, prior approval shall be 
obtained from the Commission; 
(d) 
filled by re-employing a retired officer provided that re-employment is made 
for a specified period of one year ***[not exceeding two years] in a post not 
higher than the post in which the person was employed on regular basis before 
retirement; and 
                                                          
* Omitted vide Estt. Div.‘s Notification SRO No. 147(I)/84 dated 09-02-1984. 
** Substituted vide an Act No. X of 2005, dated 6th July, 2005. 
 Words ―not exceeding two years‖ were omitted vide Estt. Division‘s Notification S.R.O No. 1245 (I)/2008 
dated 27-11-2008 have been restored w.e.f. 25-03-2010 on expiry of the Ordinance. Please see clarification 
after Sl.No. 7.1 ESTACODE (Editiion-2021). 

Page -258                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
(e) 
filled by the employment, other than posts in pay scale 17 filled by serving 
armed forces officers on the recommendations of FPSC, or employment of 
persons who are, or have been officers of the armed forces of Pakistan and 
held, or have held such posts therein as are declared by the President to be 
equivalent to the posts to be so filled. 
 
[4. The Commission shall test civil servants, appointed at any time between 
the first day of January, 1972 and the fifth day of July, 1977, or promoted to a higher post 
or grade during the said period whose cases may be referred to the Commission by the 
President, and make a report to the President whether they are fit to hold the post to 
which they were appointed or promoted, as the case may be, and, if not, whether, they are 
fit to hold any other civil post [equivalent or lower, as the case may be], compatible 
with their qualifications and experience.] 
 
***[5. The Commission shall, on a reference made by the appointing authority, 
test persons, who may have been appointed to a civil post without observing the 
prescribed procedure or without fulfilling the prescribed qualifications, experience and 
age limits, and advise whether they are fit to hold the post to which they were appointed, 
and, if not, whether they are fit to hold any other civil post in the same or lower Basic 
Scale compatible with their qualifications and experience.] 
@‖SCHEDULE‖ 
(See Rule 3(a)     
Posts excluded from the purview of the Commission 
 
 
 
Ministry, Division or Organization 
 
Name of post 
 
1. 
President's Secretariat 
 
 
 
All posts 
 
 
(Personal or Public) 
@@2.  
Directorate General of 
 
 
 
All posts 
 
 
Inter Services Intelligence (ISI) 
[Authority: Estt. Div.‘s Notification S.R.O. No. 1316 (I)/78, dated 9-11-1978]. 
 
7.4 
Consultation with FPSC in  
Matters of Appointment 
 
Reference.— Section 7 of the Federal Public Service Commission Ordinance, 
1977 (No. XLV of 1977). 
x      x 
    x       x 
x 
x 
 
2. 
The Federal Public Service Commission (Functions) Rules, 1978 which 
prescribe the posts in connection with the affairs of the Federation recruitment to which 
should be made through the Commission. These rules provide that all posts in BPS 16 
and above which are filled by direct recruitment shall be filled through the Federal Public 
                                                          
  Subs. vide Establishment Division SRO No. 147(1)/84, dated 9-2-1984. 
 Subs. vide Estt. Division Notification No. 3/1/92-R-2 dated 15-09-1993 
*** Added vide Estt. Div.‘s Notification SRO 848(I)/2002, dated 27-11-2002. 
@ Amended vide Estt. Div.'s Notification No. SRO 415/2000, dated 19-06-2000. 
@@  Inserted vide Estt. Div.'s Notification SRO 424(1)/2005, dated 12-05-2005. 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -259 
 
 
Service Commission. The rules also provide that appointments against these posts may be 
made on ad-hoc basis, independently of the Commission for a period of six months but an 
extension for a further period of six months may be given, with the approval of the 
Commission, if a requisition for filling the post was sent to the Commission within one 
month of the filling of the post on ad hoc basis. The Ministries and Divisions are 
requested to ensure that all posts in BPS 16 and above falling in the direct recruitment 
quota should, as in the past, continue to be filled through Federal Public Service Commis-
sion. No extension in ad hoc appointments would be given unless a requisition has been 
placed with the Commission and Commission's approval to the extension of the ad hoc 
appointment for a further period of six months has been obtained by the Ministry 
concerned. 
 
3.  
It will also be observed from clause (b) of section 7 of the Federal Public 
Service Commission Ordinance, 1977, that the Commission will advise the President on 
matters relating to qualifications for, and methods of recruitment to, the services and 
posts recruitment to which is required to be made through the Commission. This being a 
statutory requirement should invariably be observed. It is open to the Ministry/Division 
concerned either to make a simultaneous reference on the subject to the Establishment 
Division and the Federal Public Service Commission, or to first consult the Establishment 
Division and thereafter make a reference to the Commission. If there have been any cases 
after the 22nd December, 1977 when the F.P.S.C. Ordinance came into force, where the 
concurrence of Establishment Division was obtained but not that of the Commission, an 
immediate reference may now please be made to the Commission so that the 
requirements of the statute are complied with.  Attention in this connection is also invited 
to the Federal Public Service Commission's Circular letter No. F. 12/1/78-S, dated  
12th August, 1978. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M.NO.1/2/78-DV, dated 27-8-1978.] 
7.5 
Consultation with Federal Public Service  
Commission in Respect of Recruitment Rules 
 
It will be observed from clause (b) of section 7 of the Federal Public Service 
Commission Ordinance, 1977, that the Commission will advise the President on matters 
relating to qualifications for, and methods of recruitment to, the services and posts 
recruitment to which is required to be made through the Commission. This being a 
statutory requirement should invariably be observed. It is open to the Ministry/Division 
concerned either to make a simultaneous reference on the subject to the Establishment 
Division and the Federal Public Service Commission, or to first consult the Establishment 
Division and thereafter make a reference to the Commission. If there have been any cases 
after the 22nd December, 1977 when the F.P.S.C. Ordinance came into force, where the 
concurrence of Establishment Division was obtained but not that of the Commission, an 
immediate reference may now please be made to the Commission so that the 
requirements of the statute are complied with. Attention in this connection is also invited 
to the Federal Public Service Commission's Circular letter No.F.12/1/78, dated 
12.8.1978. 
[Authority.- Para 3 of Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.11/2/78-DV., dated 27-8-1979]. 

Page -260                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
7.6 
Procedure for Rejection of the Advice of the 
Federal Public Service Commission 
 
In supersession of the Cabinet Secretariat (Establishment Branch) Office 
Memorandum No. 10/3/50-SEII, dated the 13th June, 1950, on the subject of the 
convention regarding acceptance of the advice of the Federal Public Service commission, 
the government have been pleased to decide that the advice of the Federal Public Service 
Commission in a case referred to it shall be accepted by the Ministry/Division/ 
Department concerned, subject to the provisions of para 2, below. 
 
2.  
Where a referring Ministry, Division or Department disagrees with the 
advice given, it shall communicate the reasons for disagreement to the Commission, and 
after the Commission has expressed its further views in the  matter,  the   case   will  be 
submitted for decision to the President through the Establishment Division. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 3/3/59-E VII, dated 4-6-1960]. 
7.7 
Supply of Character Rolls  
to the Commission 
 
The Commission have noticed that many Character Rolls they receive in 
connection with selections, appointments, etc., are incomplete. Sometimes, reports for 
several years are missing, making it difficult for the Commission to determine the 
suitability of the officers concerned for the posts for which they are being considered. 
The Commission, therefore, request the Ministries/Divisions to satisfy themselves that 
Character Rolls are complete and up-to-date before sending them to the Commission. 
2. 
The Ministries/Divisions and the Heads of the Departments should forward the 
Character Rolls as quickly as possible on demand by the Commission. 
[Authority.- FPSC‘s O.M.No.F.16/17/53-S, dated 24-04-1953 & FPSC‘s O.M.No.F.1/30/53-R, 
dated 06-12-1956]. 
 
7.8 
Nomination of Departmental Representatives 
 
 
to Assist the Commission at the Interviews for 
 
 
Various Posts 
 
The Federal Public Service Commission has observed that the government's 
instructions are not being followed strictly by the Ministries/ Divisions/Departments 
while nominating Departmental Representatives to assist the Commission at the 
interviews for recruitment to various posts. The Commission has also noted with 
profound regret that its requests to Ministries etc. concerned to nominate Departmental 
Representatives of relevant trades (subject wise) of sufficiently higher status i.e. not below the 
rank of Joint Secretary and or technical head of the line are not being complied with. 
 
2. 
Recently, during interviews of candidates for certain technical/ specialist 
posts, the Departmental Representatives deputed to assist the Commission were officers 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -261 
 
 
on administrative side, who were not sufficiently senior in their own departments and/or 
qualified in technical line. In order to assess the professional competence of the 
candidates properly and accurately, it is necessary that senior officers of technical 
departments with requisite qualifications are deputed by the Ministries/etc. to assist the 
Commission at the interviews for appointment to the scientific, technical and specialist 
posts. One of the drawbacks of government representation at junior level is obvious from 
some instances in which the Ministries/Divisions/Departments find it necessary to 
repudiate the contribution made by their own representatives at the interviews, on the 
grounds that they were not sufficiently experienced and, therefore, could not represent the 
point of view of their Ministries/Divisions/Departments authoritatively. 
 
3. 
The Commission fully realises that, from the point of view of 
Departmental Representatives, interviewing of candidates at the four normal centres viz: 
Peshawar, Islamabad, Lahore and Karachi, is a time consuming job, in order to finish one 
complete cycle for any appointment. For *Grade 18 and above posts, the Commission 
generally conducts interviews at one centre, but for others the Commission has to go to 
each place of interviews. 
 
4. 
In repeating its invitation to the Ministries etc. the Commission hopes 
earnestly that, at the interviews fixed by the Commission for selection of their candidates, 
their representation will invariably be not below the rank of Joint Secretary or head of 
technical department. 
 
5. 
In case of technical posts, the Commission would request that the heads of 
technical departments concerned should invariably be nominated for this purpose who 
will take full responsibility for giving the views of his department to the Commission. It 
is further requested that, as far as possible, the same representative should be deputed at 
all interview centres for a particular post, in order to ensure uniformity of standards. If 
the Ministries/Divisions/Departments are not in a position to nominate a suitable 
Departmental Representative of the right status, then the Commission will do without 
him and issue the recommendations for appointment without such help. 
[Authority.- FPSC‘s O.M.No.F.1/20/80-RIV, dated 19-4-1981]. 
7.9 
Variation Between Views of Departmental  
Representatives at the Interview and Commission's  
Advertisements for Various Posts 
 
There have been some cases where Departmental Representatives have, before 
an interview, suggested that they choose person with a particular qualification. This 
particular qualification has no particular emphasis in the advertisement and, therefore, it 
is grossly unfair on the candidates who come in response to that advertisement.  
                                                          
* BPS. 

Page -262                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
 
2. 
[X  
X 
X 
X 
X 
X] 
 
 3. 
As far as the Commission is concerned, it only relies on the recruitment rules. 
It would be in the interest of departments to review their recruitment rules so that there is no 
conflict between the recruitment rules and the Departmental Representatives. The 
Commission will, while taking the advice of the Departmental Representative, reserve the 
right to recommend only those who are in line and in accordance with the advertisement. 
[Authority.- Paras 1 & 3 of FPSC‘s letter No. F.1/35/78-RIV  dated 29-1-1979]. 
7.10 Criteria for Counting of Prescribed 
Length of Experience for Recruitment 
to Various Posts 
 
 Attention is invited to the Establishment Division's O.M. No. 39/3/75-DV (Pt), 
dated the 22nd October, 1976, and clause 'c' of para 19 of the ―INSTRUCTIONS TO 
CANDIDATES‖. A copy of these instructions is duly supplied to the candidates 
alongwith the prescribed application forms. In all the posts which are advertised by the 
Commission for selection on the basis of interview only, certain period of experience is 
generally prescribed for such posts, alongwith academic qualifications. In such cases, the 
Commission considers that experience relevant which is obtained after acquiring the 
minimum prescribed educational qualifications for the post. Experience obtained before 
acquiring the minimum prescribed educational qualification, even if it is of the same line, 
is not taken into consideration. 
 
2. 
The above procedure has often resulted in the rejection of candidates who 
happen to be the ad hoc incumbents of the post or employed in some other capacity in the 
same department.  Applications of all the candidates are duly considered by the 
Commission but candidates who fall short of the required experience after the prescribed 
minimum academic qualifications are not called for interview. This results in the 
representations from the candidates or even from the departments who are keenly 
interested in the regularization of their ad hoc incumbents. The Establishment Division 
memorandum referred to above and a copy of the `INSTRUCTIONS TO THE 
CANDIDATES' is, therefore, brought to the notice of the department to enable them to 
know the procedure being followed by the Commission for pre-selection of candidates 
for interview, etc. For obvious reasons, the Commission cannot deviate from the 
procedure once laid down and known to all. 
 
3. 
However, there may be cases in which experience gained before acquiring 
the prescribed minimum educational qualifications may also be considered relevant by 
Ministries, etc. For example, for a medical post where post-graduate Diploma is 
prescribed as a minimum qualification, the experience gained after the Medical Degree 
but before the Diploma is often considered as relevant if so prescribed in the 
Commission's advertisement. 
 
4. 
The Ministries/Divisions are, therefore, requested that wherever they 
consider that the experience gained before acquiring the minimum prescribed educational 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -263 
 
 
qualification should also be accepted as relevant, this should be made clear while 
forwarding the requisitions for the posts and full justification may be given for providing 
this relaxation in the interest of service. The departments will also be required to certify 
that this relaxation of the general procedure had the approval of the Secretary of the 
Ministry/Division concerned. The Commission after due consideration of the proposal 
may agree to advertise this condition in its advertisements, so that the candidates 
concerned should know it before applying for the posts. Unless such a clearance is given in 
the requisition for the posts concerned and advertised by the Commission accordingly, it will 
not be possible for the Commission to deviate from the general practice stated above. 
[Authority.— FPSC‘s letter No.F.8/13/81-S, dated 08-7-1981]. 
 
7.11 Re-allocation Against the Vacancies  
Caused by Repeaters/Non-Joiners  
 
In supersession of the Establishment Division‘s O.M of even number dated 18th 
June,1990 on the above subject, it has been decided with the approval of the competent 
authority that w.e.f. Competitive Examination-1990 following system/procedure with regard 
to re-allocation against the vacancies caused by the repeaters/non-joiners will be adopted:— 
 
a) 
In the first phase, Establishment Division will issue telegrams to all the 
candidates allocated to various occupational groups/services with the advice to 
each candidates that he/she should convey his/her acceptance of the offer 
within 15 days from the date of issue of telegram failing which allocation will 
be treated as cancelled and the vacancy will be offered to the next eligible 
candidate. Simultaneously, the allocation made by the FPSC will also be 
announced in all the leading newspapers with similar advice to the candidates.  
 
b) In the second phase the vacancies occurring due to non-acceptance of offer 
within 15 days of the announcement will be reported to the FPSC for 
completing re-allocation before the commencement of the common training 
programme at the Civil Services Academy, Lahore. Any vacancy occurring 
after the start of the common training will be carried over to the next 
competitive examination.  
 
c) 
The announcement of initial allocation shall be made 45 days before the 
announcement of common training at CSA to ensure timely completion of 
both the phases indicated above.  
 [Authority.— Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 1/29/87-T.V dated 19-03-1991]. 
7.12 Withdrawal or Change of Requisition by the 
Administrative Ministries/ Divisions/Departments  
for Posts Already Advertised by the Commission 
 
It has been decided that:— 
(i) 
The requests received from Ministries/Divisions, Departments for 
withdrawal of cases wherein interviews have been started or nominations 
finalized would not be accepted. The sponsoring Ministry/Division/ 
Department should appoint the Commission's nominees even if the 
abolished post(s) had to be revived. 

Page -264                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
(ii) 
Other requests for withdrawal of requisitions would be entertained on the 
basis of merit of each case if the prescribed procedure has been followed. 
[Authority.- Para 4(i)&(ii) of Estt. Division‘s O.M. No.10(6)91/CP-I, dated 28-7-1991]. 
 
7.13 Validity Period of Waiting/Reserved Merit List 
for Making Alternate Nominations in the Cases 
of Recruitment by Selection 
 
Refer Establishment Division‘s O.M of even number dated 05-05-2010 and 28-07-
2010 regarding the above cited subject and to say that Federal Public Service Commission 
(FPSC) has further reviewed the instructions on the subject issue circulated vide Office 
Memoranda referred to above and decided as under:— 
i) 
In case of ―Recruitment by Selection‖ the reserve merit list maintained by the 
Commission shall remain valid for a period of one year form the date of 
issuance of nominations by the Commissions.  
ii) 
In case of non-joining of principal nominee(s), subsequent alternate 
nominations(s) shall be made out of the reserve list within the validity period 
of one year.  
iii) 
Request received after expiry of validity period of one year shall not be 
entertained.  
[Authority.— Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 3/21/2008-T-V dated 14-03-2011]. 
 
7.14 Validity Period of Waiting/Reserved Merit  
List for Making Alternate Nomination(s) in 
the General Recruitment Cases 
 
Refer to Establishment Division‘s O.M No. of even number dated 14-03-2011 
and the Federal Public Service Commission‘s U.O No. F.3-11/2008-FS-IV dated 19-07-
2019, on the subject cited above and Federal Public Service Commission (FPSC) has, 
over the time observed that requests for alternate nominations from the 
Ministries/Divisions reached FPSC after expiry of one year period; causing failure to 
nominate out of the reserved merit list. 
2. 
In order to make maximum nominations from the reserve merit list against 
non-joiners, the Federal Public Service Commission has decided to extend validity period 
of the said list from existing one year (12 months) to one and a half years (18 months). 
The request for alternate nominations received after expiry of the extended validity 
period of 18 months will not be entertained.   
[Authority.— Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 3/21/2008-T-V dated 30-07-2019]. 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -265 
 
 
INDUCTION  
I. 
INDUCTION IN SECRETARIAT POSTS 
 
8.1 
Eligibility of Officers for Appointment in Secretariat Posts 
 
It has been decided with the approval of the Prime Minister that government 
servants in the following BPS will now be eligible for appointment to Secretariat posts, 
indicated against each, by horizontal movement and without examination:— 
 
BPS 20 ............  
 
 
Joint Secretary. 
 
BPS 19 ............  
 
 
Deputy Secretary. 
 
BPS18 with 12 Years service 
 
in BPS  17 and above 
 
 
Deputy Secretary. 
 
2. 
The appointment will, however, be made if they are considered fit for 
these posts by the Central Selection Board. 
 
3. 
You are requested to kindly let us have recommendations of suitable 
officers in the above categories working in groups and departments under your administ-
rative control whom you consider fit for the posts of Deputy Secretary and Joint 
Secretary.  These names will then be placed before the Central Selection Board. 
[Authority.- Establishment Secretary's D.O. letter No.25/14/73-AV. dated 6-2-1975]. 
 
8.2 
Induction in Secretariat Group as  
Deputy Secretary (BS-19) 
 
Refer to para 3 of this Division‘s O.M.No. 2/2/75-ARC, dated 12-04-1976 
(relevant extract enclosed) which provides different methods for appointment as Deputy 
Secretary in the Secretariat Group including appointment by horizontal movement of BS-19 
regular officers of various occupational groups and services. The present Government has 
reviewed the matter in the light of (a) to give some special dispensation of officers/persons 
belonging to Balochistan. (b) to provide opportunities for appointment of persons having 
rendered longer satisfactory service on higher positions in the Autonomous/Semi-
Autonomous Bodies /Corporations as Deputy Secretary in Government of Pakistan. 
2. 
With the approval of Competent Authority, it has now been decided to 
modify para 3 of Establishment Division‘s O.M.No. 2/2/75-ARC, dated 12-04-1976 
constituting the Secretariat Group as under:— 

Page -266                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
Modified para 3 of the O.M. constituting Secretariat Group 
Deputy Secretary 
Appointment to the post of Deputy Secretary will be made in accordance with 
the following methods:-  
i) 
By promotion of BS-18 officers of the Office Management Group on the 
recommendations of the Departmental Selection Board except to the extent 
indicated at (ii) to (v) below. 
ii) By horizontal movement from other Occupational Groups/Service/ Cadre of 
regular BS-19 Officers who have been recommended by the Ministries/ 
Divisions Departments OR regular BS-19 Provincial Civil Servants 
recommended by the respective Provincial Governments and have been found 
fit by the Central Selection Board in accordance with criteria laid down by the 
Federal Governments against the 10% of sanctioned posts of Deputy 
Secretary (BS-19). The said 10% posts shall be further sub-divided in the ratio 
of 50:50 for induction of Civil Servants from Federal Government and Civil 
Servants from Provincial Governments. 
iii) By direct appointment on the recommendations of Federal Public Service 
Commission of persons possessing such qualifications and experience etc., as 
may be prescribed.  
iv) Appointment of persons in BS-19 or equivalent in the service of an 
Autonomous, Semi-Autonomous Body or Corporation or any other 
Organization set up, establishment owned managed or controlled by the 
Federal Government or Provincial Government recommended by the 
respective Governments and found fit by the Federal Public Service 
Commission in accordance with the criteria laid down by the Federal 
Government in consultation with FPSC against additional 10%  of sanctioned 
posts of Deputy Secretary (BS-19)  as and when so  decided by the 
government. The said 10% seats shall be further sub-divided in the ratio of 
50:50 for induction of persons in the service of Federal Government and those 
persons in service of Provincial Government.  
v) 
10% of annual vacancies of Deputy Secretary (BS-19) to be filled by the 
retired officers of Armed Forces of Pakistan on the recommendation of 
Defence Services Officers Selection Board in line with the existing policy for 
induction / re-employment of officers of Armed Services as may be modified 
from time to time. 
3. 
The Criteria for induction of regular (BS-19) officers of the Federal 
Occupational Groups/ Services and the BS-19 Civil Servants of Provincial Governments 
as Deputy Secretary (BS-19)  in the Secretariat Group shall be as under:— 
i) 
The regular BS-19 officers of Federal Occupational Group/Service/ 
Cadre/Provincial 
Governments 
as 
recommended 
by 
the 
respective 
Ministries/Divisions/Departments /Provincial Governments concerned. 
ii) The officer has rendered at least 12 years service in BS-17 & above in terms 
of instructions issued by the Federal Government from time to time, and 
having served for two years in BS-19 in the Federal Secretariat on deputation 
/under Section 10 of Civil Servants Act, 1973. 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -267 
 
 
iii) PERs of the last twelve years in BS-17 & above or the actual service rendered 
in B-17 & above, as the case may be will be quantified. 70 marks will be 
assigned for PERs quantification. 
iv) 30 marks will be assigned for assessment of suitability by the Central 
Selection Board. 
v) The selection will be on the basis of centralized merit in PERs/assessment by 
CSB. 
vi) These officers will be considered in order of seniority against seats as may be 
reserved / allotted to each Occupational Group/Service/Ex-cadre/Provincial 
/Region. 
vii) Provided that other things remaining the same, Civil Servants belonging to 
Balochistan shall be given preference.  
viii) Seniority shall reckon from the date of regular induction in Secretariat Group 
in accordance with Civil Servants (Seniority) Rules, 1973. 
ix) No disciplinary action under the Government Servants (E&D) Rules, 1973 or 
proceedings on criminal charges in the Court of Law is pending against the 
officer.  
x) The officer did not derive any benefit in pursuance of NRO in the entire 
career (BS-17 & above) within the meaning of Supreme Court of Pakistan‘s 
Judgment dated 16-12-2009 on NRO.  
xi) No punishment has been awarded under any criminal law including NAB 
Ordinance to the officer concerned on the panel in the entire career (BS-17 & 
above).  
 
4. 
Persons in BS-19 or equivalent in the service of Autonomous/Semi-
Autonomous Bodies or Corporations etc. set-up, established, owned, managed or 
controlled by the Federal Government or Provincial Government shall be considered for 
induction as Deputy Secretary (BS-19) in the Secretariat Group in accordance with the 
following eligibility criteria devised in consultation with FPSC:— 
 
Sl.  
No. 
Criteria  
Requisite eligibility 
(a) 
Minimum 
education 
qualification 
Graduation 
(b) 
Experience 
A regular officer holding post in BS-19/equivalent in Federal 
/Provincial Government or in Autonomous Bodies /Semi 
Autonomous Bodies/ Corporations working under the Federal 
/Provincial Government with minimum 12 years service 
equivalent to BS-17 and above. 
 
If doubt arises in equivalence in any case, decision shall be 
taken by Establishment Division in consultation with Federal 
Public Service Commission. 
 
 

Page -268                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
Sl.  
No. 
Criteria  
Requisite eligibility 
(c) 
Age 
Not exceeding 50 year so other similar reports in a post 
equivalent to BS-17 and above reasonable period and earn 
pension as Civil Servant. 
(d) 
Weightage 
of PERs  
Satisfactory PERs or other similar reports in a post equivalent 
to BS-17 and above without adverse remarks. 
(e) 
Interview 
FPSC shall conduct viva for purpose of selection. Qualifying 
marks in viva voce shall be 101 out of 200.  
(f) 
Other 
matters 
The officers will be considered in order of seniority against 
seats as may be reserved/ allotted to each of this category. 
Seniority shall reckon from the date of regular induction in 
Secretariat Group in accordance with Civil Servants 
(Seniority) Rules, 1993. 
No disciplinary action under the Government Servants (E&D) 
Rules, 1973 or proceedings on criminal charges in the Court of 
Law is pending against the officer. 
The officer did not derive any benefit in pursuance of NRO in 
the entire career (BS-17 & above) within the meaning of 
Supreme Court of Pakistan‘s Judgment dated 16-12-2009 on 
NRO. 
No punishment has been awarded under any criminal law 
including NAB Ordinance to the officer concerned on the 
panel in the entire career (BS-17 & above). 
Merit/Provincial/Regional quota as described by the Govern-
ment shall apply mutatis mutandis on vacancies to be filled 
through induction.  
Other things remaining the same, persons belonging to 
Balochistan shall be given preference. 
5. 
The aforesaid induction shall be made gradually so as to complete the 
target of inductions of 20% (10+10) of the sanctioned posts of Deputy Secretary in next 
2-3 years, 
[Authority:- Establishment Division‘s O.M.No.1/15/92-CP-II dated  04-10-2011]. 
Clarification of Induction in Secretariat Group as Deputy Secretary (BS-19) 
 
The policy for induction of civil servants (BS-19) as well as employees in BS-19 / 
equivalent in service of Federal / Provincial Autonomous Bodies / Semi-Autonomous 
Bodies/Corporations as Deputy Secretary (BS-19) in Secretariat Group has been 
circulated vide Establishment Division‘s O.M. No.1/15/92-CP-II dated 4-10-2011. 
 
2. 
The said Policy, inter-alia, provides that: 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -269 
 
 
(a) 
10% posts of Deputy Secretary are reserved for induction of Provincial / 
Federal Civil Servants. The said 10% of the sanctioned posts of Deputy 
Secretary (BS-19) to be further sub-divided in the ratio of 50:50 for 
induction of Civil Servants from Federal Government Civil Servants from 
Provincial Government. The criteria for inductions of Civil Servants has 
been provided at para 3 of the said O.M. 
(b) 
10% of the sanctioned posts of Deputy Secretary are reserved for 
appointment of employees of Autonomous Bodies / Semi-Autonomous 
Bodies / Corporations. The said 10% seats to be further sub-divided in the 
ratio of 50:50 for induction of persons in the service of said bodies Federal 
Government and Provincial Government. The criteria for induction of 
employees of Autonomous Bodies / Semi-Autonomous Bodies / Corporations 
have been provided at para 4 of the said O.M. dated 4-10-2011. 
 
3. 
Vacancy position will be intimated in due course. 
 
4. 
Meanwhile, each Ministry/Division is requested to send panel of the 
suitable officer (not exceeding 10 in each category in para-2) in order of seniority as per 
prescribed criteria to this Division by 22nd December, 2011 for further action. The 
Panels (Form IP-I and IP-II) to be signed by the Secretary. The Panels should accompany 
particulars of each of the Civil Servant / person concerned on the Panel Proforma (IP-III 
& IV) and Quantification Sheets (IP-V&VI enclosed.) the said Panel Proforma and 
Quantification Sheet to be signed the Joint Secretary (Admn.) concerned.  
[Authority:-Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.1/15/92-CP-II, dated 07-12-2011]. 
 
8.3 
Induction in Secretariat Group 
as Joint Secretary (BS-20) 
 
Refer to the subject noted above and to say that the policy for induction of Civil 
Servants (BS-20) as well as persons in BS-20/equivalent in service of Federal/Provincial 
Autonomous Bodies/Semi-Autonomous Bodies/Corporations etc. as Joint Secretary           
(BS-20) in Secretariat Group has been circulated vide Establishment Division‘s 
O.M.No.6/1/2012-CP-II(A) dated 30-05-2012 (Annex). 
 
2. 
The said Policy, inter-alia provides that appointment to the post of Joint 
Secretary (BS-20) will be made in accordance with the following methods:- 
i) 
By promotion of officers in the Grade of Deputy Secretary on the 
recommendations of the Central Selection Board. 
ii) 
By horizontal movement from other Occupational Groups/ Service/ Cadre 
of regular BS-20 Officers who have been recommended by the 
Ministries/Divisions/Departments OR regular BS-20 Provincial Civil 
Servants recommended by the respective Provincial Governments who 
meet the laid down criteria and recommended by the Central Selection 

Page -270                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
Board against the 06% annual vacancies of Joint Secretary (BS-20). The 
said 06% annual vacancies shall be further sub-divided in the ratio of 
50:50 for induction of Civil Servants from Federal Government and Civil 
Servants from Provincial Governments. 
iii) 
By direct appointment on the recommendations of Federal Public Service 
Commission of persons possessing such qualifications and experience etc., 
as may by prescribed. 
iv) 
Appointment of persons in BS-20 or equivalent in the service of an 
Autonomous, semi-Autonomous Body or Corporation or any other 
Organization set up, established owned, managed or controlled by the 
Federal Government or Provincial Government recommended by the 
respective Governments who meet the laid down criteria and 
recommended by the Federal Public Service Commission against 04% of 
annual vacancies of Joint Secretary (BS-20) as and when so decided by the 
government. The said 04% vacancies shall be further sub-divided in the 
ratio of 50:50 for induction of persons in the service of Federal 
Government and those persons in service of Provincial Governments. 
 
3. 
The criteria  for induction of civil servants in terms of para 2(ii) is given at 
para 3 of the annex O.M. No. 6/1/2012-CP-II(A) dated 30-05-2012. The criteria for 
induction of persons in the service of Autonomous/Semi-Autonomous Bodies/ Corpora-
tions etc. in terms of para 2(iv) are given at para 4 of the said O.M dated 30-05-2012. 
 
4. 
Vacancy position will be intimated in due course. 
 
5. 
Meanwhile, each Ministry/Division is requested to send panel of the 
suitable officers (not exceeding 05 in each category in para-2) in order of seniority as per 
prescribed criteria to this Division by 7th June,2012 for further action. The panels (Form 
IP-A and IP-B) to be signed by the Secretary. The Panels should accompany particulars 
of each of the Civil Servant/person concerned on the Panel Proforma (IP-C &D) and 
quantification sheets (IP-E&F). The said Panel Proforma and quantification Sheet to be 
signed by the Joint Secretary (Admn) concerned.   
[Authority:-Establishment Division‘s O.M.No. 6/1/2012-CP-II (B) dated 30-05-2012]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -271 
 
 
Annexure 
 
GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN 
CABINET SECRETARIAT 
ESTABLISHMENT DIVISION 
********* 
 
No.6/1/2012-CP-II (A) 
 
 
                   Islamabad, 30th May,2012. 
 
OFFICE MEMORANDUM 
 
Subject:- 
Induction in Secretariat Group as Joint Secretary (BS-20) 
 
 
The undersigned is directed to say that with the approval of Competent 
Authority, it has now been decided to modify para 4 (relevant extract enclosed) of 
Establishment  Division‘s O.M.No. 2/2/75-ARC, dated 12-04-1976 consisting the 
Secretariat as under:— 
 
Modified para 4 of the O.M. dated 12-04-1976 consisting Secretariat Group 
 
Joint Secretary 
Appointment to the post of Joint Secretary will be made in accordance with the 
following methods:— 
i) 
By promotion of officers in the Grade of Deputy Secretary on the 
recommendations of the Central Selection Board. 
ii) By horizontal movement from other Occupational Groups/ Service/Cadre of 
regular BS-20 Officers who have been recommended by the Ministries/ 
Divisions Departments Or regular BS-20 Provincial Civil Servants 
recommended by the respective Provincial Governments who meet the laid 
down criteria and recommended by the Central Selection Board against the 
06% annual vacancies of Joint Secretary (BS-20). The said 06% annual 
vacancies shall be further sub-divided in the ratio of 50:50 for induction of Civil 
Servants from Federal Government and Civil Servants from Provincial 
Governments. 
iii) By direct appointment on the recommendations of Federal Public Service 
Commission of persons possessing such qualifications and experience etc., as 
may be prescribed. 
iv) Appointment of persons in BS-20 or equivalent in the service of an 
Autonomous, Semi-Autonomous Body or Corporation or any other 
Organization set up, established owned, managed or controlled by the  
Federal Government or Provincial Government recommended by the 
respective Governments who meet the laid down criteria and recommended 
by the Federal Public Service Commission against 04%  of annual vacancies 

Page -272                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
of Joint Secretary (BS-20) as and when so decided by the government. The 
said 04% vacancies shall be further sub-divided in the ration of 50:50 for 
induction of persons in the service of Federal Government and those persons 
in service of Provincial Governments.  
 
2. 
The Criteria devised in consultation with FPSC for induction of regular 
BS-20 officers of the Federal Occupation  Groups/ Services and the BS-20 Civil Servants 
of Provincial Government as Joint Secretary (BS-20) in the Secretariat Group shall be as 
under:— 
 
a. 
The regular BS-20 officers of Federal Occupational Group/Service/ 
Cadre/Provincial Governments as recommended by the respective Ministries/ 
Divisions/Departments /Provincial Governments concerned. 
b. The officer has rendered at least 17 years service in BS-17 & above in terms of 
instructions issued by the Federal Government from time to time, and having 
served for two years in BS-20 in the Federal Secretariat on deputation /under 
Section 10 of Civil Servants Act, 1973. 
c. 
PERs of the last twelve years in BS-17 & above or the actual service rendered in 
BS-17 & above, as the case may be, will be quantified. 70 marks will be assigned 
for PERs quantification. However, the officers will only be eligible if they have 
earned grading ―Good‖ or equivalent and above in their PERs in BS-17 & above. 
d. 30 marks will be assigned for assessment of suitability by the Central Selection 
Board. 
e. 
The selection will be on the basis of centralized merit in PERs/assessment by 
CSB.  
f. 
The officers will be considered in order of seniority against seats as may be 
reserved/allotted 
to 
each 
Occupational 
Group/Service/Cadre/Ex-cadre/ 
Province/Region. 
Provides that other things remaining the same, Civil Servants belonging 
to Balochistan shall be given preference.  
g. Seniority shall reckon from the date of regular induction in Secretariat Group 
in accordance with Civil Servants (Seniority) Rules, 1993. 
h. 
No disciplinary action under the Government Servants (E&D) Rules, 1973 or 
proceedings on criminal charges in the Court of Law is pending against the officer. 
i. 
The officer did not derive any benefit in pursuance of NRO in the entire career 
(BS-17 & above) within the meaning of Supreme Court of Pakistan‘s 
Judgment dated 16-12-2009 on NRO. 
j. 
No punishment has been awarded under any criminal law including NAB 
Ordinance to the officer concerned on the panel in the entire career (BS-17 & 
above). 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -273 
 
 
 
3. 
Persons in BS-20 or equivalent in the service of Autonomous/Semi-
Autonomous Bodies or Corporations etc. set-up, establishment, owned, managed or 
controlled by the Federal Government or Provincial Governments shall be considered for 
induction as Joint  Secretary (BS-20) in the Secretariat Group in accordance with the 
following eligibility criteria devised in consultation with FPSC:- 
 
Sl. No. 
Criteria 
Requisite eligibility 
(a) 
Minimum 
educational 
qualification 
Master‘s Degree in Human Resources Management / 
Financial Management/Law/Economics/Public Administr-
ation / Public policy. 
(b) 
Experience 
A regular officer holding post in BS-20/equivalent in 
Autonomous/Semi-Autonomous Bodies/Corporations work-
ing 
under 
the 
Federal/Provincial 
Government 
with 
minimum 17 years services equivalent to BS-17 and above. 
If doubt arises in equivalence in any case, decision shall be 
taken by Establishment Division in consultation with 
Federal Public Service Commission.  
(c) 
Age 
Not exceeding 50 years so that he may serve the Federal 
Government for reasonable period and earn pension as Civil 
Servant.  
(d) 
Weightage of 
PERs 
Good / equivalent and above PERs or other similar reports 
in a post equivalent to BS-17 and above without adverse 
remarks.  
(e) 
Interview 
FPSC shall conduct viva for the purpose of selection. 
Qualifying marks in viva voce shall be 101 out of 200. 
(f) 
Other matters 
The officers will be considered in order of seniority against 
seats as may be reserved / allotted to each of this category. 
Seniority shall reckon from the date of regular induction in 
Secretariat Group in accordance with Civil Servants 
(Seniority) Rules, 1993. 
No disciplinary action under the Government Servants 
(E&D) Rules, 1973 or proceedings on criminal charges in 
the Court of Law is pending against the officer.  
The officer did not derive any benefit in pursuance of NRO in 
the entire career (BS-17 & above) within the meaning of 
Supreme Court of Pakistan‘s Judgment dated 16-12-2009 on 
NRO. 

Page -274                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
No punishment has been awarded under any criminal law 
including NAB Ordinance to the officer concerned on the 
panel in the entire career (BS-17 & above) . 
Merit / Provincial / Regional Quota as described by the 
Government shall apply mutatis mutandis on vacancies to 
be filled through induction. 
Other things remaining the same persons belonging to 
Balochistan shall be given preference.   
 
 
 
 
(Muhammad Wishaq) 
 
   Deputy Secretary 
   
       Tele:9207036 
 
Secretaries/Additional Secretaries 
Incharge of the Ministries/Divisions 
Islamabad/Rawalpindi 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -275 
 
 
IP-A 
 
PANEL OF CIVIL SERVANTS (BS-20) OF THE FEDERAL/PROVINCIAL 
GOVERNMENT FOR INDUCTION AS JOINT SECRETARY (BS-20) IN 
SECRETARIAT GROUP OF FEDERAL GOVERNMENT 
 
Seniority 
No. 
Name of the Officer 
Name of Department 
1. 
 
 
2. 
 
 
3. 
 
 
4. 
 
 
5. 
 
 
6. 
 
 
7. 
 
 
8. 
 
 
9. 
 
 
10. 
 
 
 
It is certified that:- 
 
a) All the officers on the panel are the regular BS-20 officers of Federal 
Occupational Group/Service/Cadre/Provincial Governments. 
b) The officer has rendered at least 17 years service in BS-17 & above in terms of 
instructions issued by the Federal Government from time to time, and having 
served for two years in BS-20 in the Federal Secretariat on deputation/under 
Section 10 of Civil Servants Act, 1973. 
c) No disciplinary action under Government Servants (E&D) Rules,1973/Removal 
from Service (Special Powers) Ordinance 2000 or proceedings on criminal 
charges in the court of law is/are pending against any of the officer on the panel.  
d) No penalty was awarded to the officers on the panel during the entire career 
(BS-17 and above).  
e) No punishment under any criminal law including NAB Ordinance was awarded 
to the officers on the panel during the entire career (BS-17 & above). 
f) 
None of the officers on the panel derived any benefit in pursuance of NRO in 
the entire career (BS-17 and above) within the meaning of Supreme Court of 
Pakistan Judgment dated 16-12-2009 on NRO. 
 
Dated:____________________ 
 
Secretary of the Federal 
Government /Chief 
Secretary to the 
Govt. of ________ 
                                                          
 Now Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules,2020. 

Page -276                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
IP-B 
PANEL OF PERSONS (BS-20/EQUIVALENT) IN THE SERVICE OF 
AUTONOMOUS/SEMI-AUTONOMOUS BODIES/CORPORATIONS OF THE 
FEDERAL/ PROVINCIAL GOVERNMENT FOR INDUCTION AS JOINT 
SECRETARY(BS-20) IN SECRETARIAT GROUP OF FEDERAL GOVERNMENT 
 
Seniority 
No.            
(if applicable) 
Name of Officer 
Name of the Autonomous/ Semi-
Autonomous Bodies/ Corporations 
 
1. 
 
 
2. 
 
 
3. 
 
 
4. 
 
 
5. 
 
 
6. 
 
 
7. 
 
 
8. 
 
 
9. 
 
 
10. 
 
 
 
It is certified that:- 
a) 
The persons on the panel hold Master‘s Degree in Human Resources Management / 
Financial Management / Law  / Economics /Public Administration /Public Policy.  
b) 
The persons on the panel are regular officers holding post in BS-20/equivalent in 
Autonomous Bodies/Semi-Autonomous Bodies/ Corporations working under the Federal 
Government with minimum 17 years service equivalent to BS-17 and above. 
c) 
No Disciplinary action under Government Servants (E&D) Rules 1973 / Removal from 
Service (Special Powers) Ordinance 2000 or proceedings on criminal charges in the court 
of law is /are pending against any of the officer on the panel.  
d) 
No penalty was awarded to the officers on the panel during the entire career (BS-17 and 
above). 
e) 
No punishment under any criminal law including NAB Ordinance was awarded to the 
officers on the panel during the entire career (BS-17 and above). 
f) 
None of the persons on the panel derived any benefit in pursuance of NRO in the entire 
career (BS-17 and above) within the meaning of Supreme Court of Pakistan judgment 
dated 16-12-2009 on NRO. 
 
Dated:____________________ 
Secretary of the Federal 
Government /Chief Secretary 
to the 
 Govt. of __________ 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -277 
 
 
IP-C 
PANEL PROFORMA FOR CENTRAL SELECTION  
BOARD FOR INDUCTION OF CIVIL SERVANTS (BS-20) OF  
FEDERAL/ PROVINCIAL GOVERNMENTS AS JOINT SECRETARY 
 (BS-20) IN SECRETARIAT GROUP 
(AS ON_______________) 
In respect of______________ 
 
 
Personnel No.__________________ 
Designation on _______________Name of Ministry/Division/Prov. Govt.__________________ 
Domicile: 
Service/Group/Cadre 
Sen.No 
Educational  
Qualification 
Date of Birth 
Age 
Date of Superannuation 
 
 
SERVICE PARTICULARS 
Date of Joining 
Civil Services 
Academy/ 
Service/BS-17 
Date of promotion in  
Length of Service 
Present Scale 
BS-20 
 
Total in BS-17 
and  above 
In present Scale BS-20 
 
Previous Scale 
BS-19 
 
y – m - d 
On Deputation to 
Federal Govt. 
Next previous 
Scale BS-18 
 
Appointment in BS-19&20 
BS-19 
BS-20 
1. 
 
1. 
 
2. 
 
2. 
 
 
Punishment etc. 
Existing Service 
Last 10 Years 
Penalties/Adverse remarks (if any) 
Disciplinary Proceedings (E&D Rules, 1973) 
NRO benefit, if any 
NAB cases, if any 
Training Courses (other than mandatory Training) 
 
Gradings  of mandatory training at:  
 
MCMC 
 
Number of PERs in BS-17/18, BS-19 & BS-20 (Last 17 years) 
Basic 
Scale 
Out -
Standing 
Very Good 
Good 
Average 
Below  
Average 
Adverse 
Report/Remarks 
BS-18 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BS-19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BS-20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Awaited reports (PERs) 
Additional Information (if any) 
 
 
EFFICIENCY INDEX 
Required 
Threshold 
Score of PERs (out of 70) 
Marks awarded by CSB (out 
of 30 
Total 
 
 
 
 
Recommendations of CSB 
Recommended for Induction 
Deferred for Induction 
Not recommended for 
Induction 
 
 
 
 
Prepared by:___________________ 
 
           Checked by:________________________ 
 
Countersigned 
Secretary S&GAD 
 
 
Photo 

Page -278                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
                IP-D 
PANEL PROFORMA FOR CENTRAL SELECTION  
BOARD FOR INDUCTION OF PERSONS IN THE SERVICE OF  
AUTONOMOUS/SEMI-AUTONOMOUS BODIES/ CORPORATIONS OF THE 
FEDERAL/ PROVINCIAL GOVERNMENTS AS JOINT SECRETARY 
 (BS-20) IN SECRETARIAT GROUP 
(AS ON_______________) 
In respect of _Mr._____________ 
 
 
Personnel No.__________________ 
Designation on _______________Name of Ministry/Division/Prov. Govt.__________________ 
 
Domicile: 
Service/Group/Cadre 
Sen.No 
Educational  
Qualification 
Date of Birth 
Age 
Date of Superannuation 
 
 
SERVICE PARTICULARS 
Date of Joining Civil 
Services Academy/ 
Service/BS-17 
Date of promotion in  
Length of Service 
Present ScaleBS-
20/equivalent  
 
Total in BS-17 
and  above 
In present 
Scale  
BS-20 
 
Previous Scale BS-
19/equivalent 
 
y – m - d 
On 
Deputation to 
Federal Govt. 
Next previous Scale BS-
18/equivalent 
 
Appointment in BS-19&20 
BS-19 
BS-20 
1. 
 
1. 
 
2. 
 
2. 
 
 
Punishment etc. 
Existing Service 
Last 10 Years 
Penalties/Adverse remarks (if any) 
Disciplinary Proceedings (E&D Rules, 1973) 
NRO benefit, if any 
NAB cases, if any 
Training Courses (other than mandatory Training) 
 
Gradings  of mandatory training at:  
 
MCMC, if applicable 
 
Number of PERs in BS-17/18, BS-19 & BS-20 (Last 17 years) 
Basic Scale 
Out -
Standing 
Very Good 
Good 
Average 
Below  
Average 
Adverse 
Report/ 
Remarks 
BS-18 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BS-19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BS-20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Awaited reports (PERs) 
Additional Information (if any) 
 
 
EFFICIENCY INDEX 
Marks awarded for Interview by FPSC (out of 200) 
 
 
 
 
Recommendations of CSB 
Recommended for Induction 
Deferred for Induction 
Not 
recommended  
 
 
 
 
Prepared by:___________________ 
 
            Checked by:________________________ 
Countersigned 
Secretary S&GAD 
 
 
Photo 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -279 
 
 
IP-E 
QUANTIFICATION SHEET IN R/O MR.  XXX   
DESIGNATION:_____________ 
BS-20  
Ministry/Division/Prov. Govt.___________________ 
 
BPS Year Period of PER 
Overall Assessment 
Score 
17 
1981 
24-01-81 to 21-10-81 
V. Good 
08 
 
1982 
01-01-82 to 07-08-82 
08-08-82 to 31-12-82 
V. Good 
Good 
7.60 
 
1983 
01-01-83 to 10-08-83 
13-08-83 to 31-12-83 
Average 
Good 
5.78 
 
1984 
01-01-84 to 30-06-84 
05-07-84 to 31-12-84 
Average 
Good 
5.99 
 
1985 
01-01-85 to 10-07-85 
Good 
07 
18 
1985 
14-07-85 to 31-12-85 
Average 
05 
 
1986 
01-01-86 to 17-05-86 
25-05-86 to 23-06-86 
20-07-86 to 31-12-86 
Good 
PLTM 
V. Good 
7.54 
 
1987 
01-01-87 to 16-07-87 
17-07-87 to 12-09-87 
17-09-87 to 31-12-87 
Good 
PLTM 
Average 
6.95 
 
1988 
01-01-88 to 28-05-88 
29-05-88 to 31-12-88 
Good 
Good 
07 
 
1989 
01-01-89 to 14-02-89 
15-02-89 to 01-10-89 
02-10-89 to 31-12-89 
PLTM 
V. Good 
PLTM 
08 
 
1990 
01-01-90 to 05-08-90 
20-08-90 to 30-11-90 
V. Good 
V. Good 
08 
 
1991 
01-01-91 to 02-08-91 
03-08-91 to 31-12-91 
Good 
Good 
07 
 
1992 
01-01-92 to 14-03-92 
15-03-92 to  31-12-92` 
PLTM 
V. Good 
08 
 
1993 
01-01-93 to 25-07-93 
26-07-93 to 30-12-93 
01-11-93 to 31-12-93 
V. Good 
Awaiting Posting/RNR 
Awaiting Posting /RNR 
08 
 
1994 
01-01-94 to 20-04-94 
21-04-94 to 31-12-94 
Awaiting Posting /RNR 
OSD/RNR 
- 
 
1995 
01-01-95 to 08-11-95 
09-11-95 to 31-12-95 
OSD/RNR 
PLTM 
- 
 
 
1996 
01-01-96 to 03-03-96 
PLTM 
- 
19 
1996 
04-03-96 to 10-07-96 
14-07-96 to 01-12-96 
02-12-96 to 31-12-96 
V. Good 
V. Good 
Awaiting Posting /RNR 
08 

Page -280                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
 
1997 
Full 
Awaiting Posting /RNR 
- 
 
1998 
Full 
Awaiting Posting /RNR 
- 
 
1999 
01-01-99 to 14-06-99 
15-06-99 to 31-12-99 
Awaiting Posting /RNR 
Good 
07 
 
2000 
01-01-0 to 20-08-00 
21-08-00 to 25-11-00 
26-11-00 to 31-12-00 
Good  
*NIPA/RNR 
PLTM 
07 
 
2001 
01-01-01 to 07-04-01 
08-04-01 to 22-05-01 
23-05-01 to 16-09-01 
17-09-01 to 31-12-01 
V. Good 
PLTM 
V. Good 
V. Good 
08 
 
2002 
Full 
V. Good 
08 
 
2003 
Full 
V. Good 
08 
 
2004 
Full 
Awaiting Posting /RNR 
- 
 
2005 
01-01-05 to 31-08-05 
01-09-05 to 31-12-05 
Awaiting Posting/RNR 
Awaiting Posting/RNR 
- 
 
2006 
Full 
Awaiting Posting/RNR 
- 
 
2007 
01-01-07 to 04-12-07 
01-09-07 to 31-12-07 
Awaiting Posting/RNR 
DRO/RNR 
- 
 
2008 
Full 
DRO/RNR 
- 
20 
2009 
04-03-2009 to10-07-2009 
14-07-2009 to 01-12-2009 
02-12-2009 to 31-12-2009 
V. Good 
V. Good 
Awaiting Posting/RNR 
08 
 
2010 
Full 
Awaiting Posting/RNR 
- 
 
SCORE OF OVERALL ASSESSMENT 
 
 
 
LEGEND 
 
RND 
= Report not required/Due, 
 
PLTM = Period less than three months. 
                                                          
* Now NIM. 
BPS 
Number of Grading 
OS  VG      G     AVG     BA 
Mean Score of 
broken period 
Score 
17(A) 
 
 
 
 
 
A=6.87 
A+B=14.15 
18(B) 
 
 
 
 
 
B=7.28 
19(C) 
 
 
 
 
 
3C = 7.67x3 
23.01 
20(D) 
 
 
 
 
 
5D= 8x5 
40 
Total Score of PERs={(5XD)+(3XC)+(A+B)}X.70 
54.01 
Audition for serving in Training Institution for two years. 
 
Deduction for penalty / adverse Remarks. 
 
FINAL SCORE 
54.01 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -281 
 
 
     IP-F 
QUANTIFICATION SHEET IN R/O MR.XXX  DESIGNATION:________ 
BS-20  
Ministry/Division/Prov. Govt.___________________ 
BPS Year Period of PER 
Overall Assessment 
Score 
17 
1981 
24-01-81 to 21-10-81 
V. Good 
08 
 
1982 
01-01-82 to 07-08-82 
08-08-82 to 31-12-82 
V. Good 
Good 
7.60 
 
1983 
01-01-83 to 10-08-83 
13-08-83 to 31-12-83 
Average 
Good 
5.78 
 
1984 
01-01-84 to 30-06-84 
05-07-84 to 31-12-84 
Average 
Good 
5.99 
 
1985 
01-01-85 to 10-07-85 
Good 
07 
18 
1985 
14-07-85 to 31-12-85 
Average 
05 
 
1986 
01-01-86 to 17-05-86 
25-05-86 to 23-06-86 
20-07-86 to 31-12-86 
Good 
PLTM 
V. Good 
7.54 
 
1987 
01-01-87 to 16-07-87 
17-07-87 to 12-09-87 
17-09-87 to 31-12-87 
Good 
PLTM 
Average 
6.95 
 
1988 
01-01-88 to 28-05-88 
29-05-88 to 31-12-88 
Good 
Good 
07 
 
1989 
01-01-89 to 14-02-89 
15-02-89 to 01-10-89 
02-10-89 to 31-12-89 
PLTM 
V. Good 
PLTM 
08 
 
1990 
01-01-90 to 05-08-90 
20-08-90 to 30-11-90 
V. Good 
V. Good 
08 
 
1991 
01-01-91 to 02-08-91 
03-08-90 to 31-12-91 
Good 
Good 
08 
 
1992 
01-01-92 to 14-03-92 
15-03-92 to  31-12-92` 
PLTM 
V. Good 
08 
 
1993 
01-01-93 to 25-07-93 
26-07-93 to 30-12-93 
01-11-93 to 31-12-93 
V. Good 
Awaiting Posting/RNR 
Awaiting Posting /RNR 
08 
 
1994 
01-01-94 to 20-04-94 
21-04-94 to 31-12-94 
Awaiting Posting /RNR 
OSD/RNR 
- 
 
1995 
01-01-95 to 08-11-95 
09-11-95 to 31-12-95 
OSD/RNR 
PLTM 
- 
 
 
1996 
01-01-96 to 03-03-96 
PLTM 
- 
19 
1996 
04-03-96 to 10-07-96 
14-07-96 to 01-12-96 
02-12-96 to 31-12-96 
V. Good 
V. Good 
Awaiting Posting /RNR 
08 

Page -282                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
 
1997 
Full 
Awaiting Posting /RNR 
- 
 
1998 
Full 
Awaiting Posting /RNR 
- 
 
1999 
01-01-99 to 14-06-99 
15-06-99 to 31-12-99 
Awaiting Posting /RNR 
Good 
07 
 
2000 
01-02-0 to 20-08-00 
21-08-00 to 25-11-00 
26-11-00 to 31-12-00 
Good  
*NIPA/RNR 
PLTM 
07 
 
2001 
01-02-01 to 07-04-01 
08-04-01 to 22-05-01 
23-05-01 to 16-09-01 
17-09-01 to 31-12-01 
V. Good 
PLTM 
V. Good 
V. Good 
08 
 
2002 
Full 
V. Good 
08 
 
2003 
Full 
V. Good 
08 
 
2004 
Full 
Awaiting Posting /RNR 
- 
 
2005 
01-01-05 to 31-08-05 
01-09-05 to 31-12-05 
Awaiting Posting/RNR 
Awaiting Posting/RNR 
- 
 
2006 
Full 
Awaiting Posting/RNR 
- 
 
2007 
01-01-07 to 04-12-07 
01-09-07 to 31-12-07 
Awaiting Posting/RNR 
DRO/RNR 
- 
 
2008 
Full 
DRO/RNR 
- 
20 
2009 
04-03-2009 to10-07-2009 
14-07-2009 to 01-12-2009 
02-12-2009 to 31-12-2009 
DRO/RNR  
OSD/RNR 
OSD/RNR 
- 
 
2010 
01-01-10 to 05-11-10 
06-11-10 to 31-12-2010 
OSD/RNR 
PLTM 
- 
 
SCORE OF OVERALL ASSESSMENT 
SCORE OFOVER ALL ASSESSMENT 
 
LEGEND 
 
RND 
= Report not required/Due, 
 
PLTM = Period less than three months. 
                                                          
* Now NIM. 
BPS 
Number of Grading 
OS  VG      G     AVG     BA 
Mean Score of 
broken period 
Score 
17(A) 
 
 
 
 
 
A=6.87 
A+B=14.15 
18(B) 
 
 
 
 
 
B=7.28 
19(C) 
 
 
 
 
 
3C = 7.67x3 
23.01 
20(D) 
 
 
 
 
 
     5D= 8x5 
40 
Total Score of PERs= {(5XD)+(3XC)+(A+B)}X.70 
54.01 
Audition for serving in Training Institution for two years. 
 
Deduction for penalty / adverse Remarks. 
 
FINAL SCORE 
54.01 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -283 
 
 
II. 
INDUCTION OF COMMISSIONED OFFICERS AND OTHER RANKS 
RECRUITED OR INDUCTED ON REGULAR OR CONTRACT BASIS 
IN CIVIL POSTS 
 
9.1 
Provisions Relating to Commissioned Officers  
and Other Ranks Recruited or Inducted on Regular 
Basis or on Contract in Civil Posts-Terms and Conditions 
 
It has been decided that armed forces officers seconded to Civil Ministries (other 
than Defence), Departments of the Federal/ Provincial Governments, autonomous/ 
semi-autonomous bodies and corporations etc. will be governed by the following terms 
and conditions:— 
 
1. 
Tenure 
(a) 
Officers will normally be seconded for a period upto three years 
extendable, in exceptional circumstances, by one year by the government, 
after which the officer will normally either be recalled to the parent 
service or released.  No extension in service will be allowed to officers 
who complete age/service limits for retirement during secondment. 
(b) 
If the deputation of an officer tends to become indefinitely prolonged, 
permanent absorption of the officer concerned in the civil cadre by retiring 
him from the parent service, would be considered. 
(c) 
In case of an emergency, the parent service will have the option of 
withdrawing a deputed officer without notice, if necessary. 
(d) 
An officer will have the option to request for return to his parent service if 
he feels that his service career is adversely affected by continued 
deputation. 
 
2.  
Pay and Allowances 
(a) 
The deputationists will be entitled to pay of rank, Command/ Staff/Charge 
Pay, Instructional Pay, Qualification pay, Flying Pay/Submarine Pay/ 
Special Service Group Pay/Technical Pay/ Disturbance Pay, Kit Allowa-
nce and Non-Practicing Allowance drawn by them in the Military service 
immediately before their secondment in addition to 20% of pay of the rank 
as special compensatory allowance. 
(b) 
Entertainment Allowance.– Entertainment Allowance may be allowed 
according to the equivalence of rank formula at the rate admissible on the 
civil side. 
(c) 
Senior Post Allowance.– This allowance will not be admissible in addition 
to Command/Staff/Charge/ Instructional pay etc. 
 
3. 
Pension-Including Disability/Family Pension 
(a) 
Pension, including disability/family pension, will be granted to officers 
under relevant Military Pension Rules.  They will count the period of 
service with the borrowing Ministries/Departments etc. as qualifying 
service for pension in the Army/Navy/Air Force. 

Page -284                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
(b) 
The claims that the officers or their families may have in respect of the 
disability or death during the period of their employment under the 
borrowing Ministry/Department etc., or arising out of any disability 
contracted in such service, shall be determined solely in accordance with 
the relevant Military Pension Rules, as amended from time to time, and 
the entire cost of any such pension shall be borne by borrowing 
Ministries/Departments etc. These Ministries/ Departments will also be 
liable to bear proportionate share of any gratuities/ pensions that may be 
admissible to these officers in respect of their service under Military 
Rules.  In case of officers on deputation to a Non-Government body, the 
pension contribution for pension admissible to them under relevant 
Military Pension Rules, in respect of Service rendered by them on 
deputation will be payable by the borrowing agency. 
 
4.  
Leave 
(a) 
The officers will continue to be governed by Military Leave Rules. 
(b) 
Leave account of the officers will be maintained by the parent services in 
consultation with the borrowing organisations and leave will be granted by 
the appropriate authorities in borrowing organisations under intimation to 
Service HQ/CORO/Record Office concerned.  Leave earned in the 
borrowing organizations will be availed of, as far as possible, before 
reversion to the services. 
 
5.  
Rank.– Acting/temporary rank will be retained/relinquished as if the 
officers had continued in Military Service in the appointment last held. 
 
6.  
Promotion in the Services.– While on secondment they will not be entitled 
to acting/temporary promotions.  However, substantive/ substantive temporary 
promotions will be made upto the rank held at the time they were seconded to civil 
department. This paragraph does not apply to AMC officers. 
 
7.  
Traveling Allowance / Daily Allowance / Conveyance Allowance.–As 
admissible under civil rules. 
 
8. 
Accommodation etc. 
(a) 
Government accommodation will be provided under civil rules and rent 
will be paid under those rules. 
(b) 
Normal water/electricity charges prevalent at the station will be paid. 
(c) 
No Service accommodation/furniture will be provided. 
 
9. 
Purchase of Rations from Service Sources and other Purchases from 
Canteen Stores Deptts/Officers‘ Shops etc.– They will not be entitled to make the above 
purchases. 
 
10.  Provision of Batman.– Batman will not be provided. 
                                                          
CORO: Chief Officers‘ Record Office. 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -285 
 
 
 
11.  Cost of Passage/TA for joining post in the Ministry/Department and 
returning therefrom.– This will be borne by the borrowing Ministry/ Department etc. 
 
12.   Defence Services Officers Provident Fund Contribution.– The officers will 
continue to contribute towards DSOP Fund. 
 
13.  Advance.– The officers may be allowed House Building Advance/ Motor 
Car Advance from the relevant Services Budget as permissible under relevant Service Rules. 
 
14.   Discipline.– The officers will continue to be governed by the provisions of 
their respective Service Act/Rules/Laws.  Day to day conduct and discipline will be 
governed by the rules of the borrowing Ministries/Departments etc. concerned. 
 
15.  In addition to the above, all other special concessions or perquisites such as 
free residential accommodation, use of transport at government expense etc. which, 
otherwise normally go with a particular appointment to which the officer may happen to be 
seconded, will also be admissible to him. 
 
16. 
The above perquisites are without prejudice to any improvements which the 
borrowing department may sanction in individual cases under special circumstances in 
consultation with their financial authorities. 
 
17.  Government letters containing the above terms will be issued in individual 
cases by the borrowing Ministries/ Departments etc. 
 
18. 
The provisions of this JSI are not applicable to:- 
(a) 
officers serving in the civil armed forces (who will continue to be) governed 
by their existing rules; and 
(b) 
officers who are absorbed in the civil department. 
 
19.  This JSI*shall take effect from 14-12-1981. 
 
20. 
JSI* No. 46/59, PAC-666/60 and Ministry of Defence letter No. 401/64/ 
PS-3 (a) 4005/D-2-A dated the 5th June, 1965 may be treated as superseded by this JSI*. 
[Authority:– JSI 4/85-case No.F-2/70/D-24,(C-IV)/83,ASMF Dy.No.164/S/ASMF of 1985] 
 
9.2 
Terms and Conditions of Service of  
Army Engineer Officers Transferred  
to the Survey of Pakistan 
 
1. 
 General.– A fixed quota of 1/3rd of the available regular vacancies in the 
Central Service, Class I**, of the Survey of Pakistan in the grade of Assistant Superintendent 
of Survey shall be reserved for the officers of the Corps of Engineers, Pakistan Army. 
Normally, the Corps of Engineers officers shall be of 5-6 years commissioned service, 
including antedate, if any, at the time of appointment in the Survey of Pakistan. 
                                                          
 Joint Services Instructions. 
** BPS 17. Technically, Class I refers to BPS 1-22. Here the nomenclature of the post given implies BPS 17. 

Page -286                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
 
2. 
 Selection.– The Surveyor-General shall intimate to the Military Secretary at 
General Headquarters the number of vacancies in the grade of Assistant Superintendent of 
Survey reserved for army officers as and  when they fall vacant. The Military Secretary shall 
then ask for volunteers from the Corps of Engineers and, in consultation with the Engineer-
in-Chief, recommend suitable candidates to the Surveyor General. The appointment shall be 
made by the Government of Pakistan on the recommendations of the Surveyor-General. 
 
3. 
 Probation.–  
(a) 
On first appointment, officers shall be on probation for a period of two years. 
If an officer is found unsuitable and the Surveyor-General desires his 
reversion to the army or his services are required by the army during this 
period he may be reverted to the army by mutual agreement. The officers will 
have the option to revert to the army during the probationary period. 
(b) 
On successful completion of the probationary period, the officer shall be 
confirmed as Assistant Superintendent of Survey in the Survey of Pakistan. 
 
4. 
Training.– The officers shall be exempted by General Headquarters from 
passing any army promotion examinations, etc. This concession shall, however, cease upon 
their reversion to the Army either during or on completion of the probationary period, when 
they may be given a maximum of two chances to pass the appropriate promotion examination. 
 
5. 
 Conditions of Service During Probationary Period.– During the 
probationary period, the officers shall remain on the effective list of the Army and shall 
be counted as supernumerary to the authorised strength of the Corps of Engineers, and 
shall be governed by the following rules :- 
(a) 
Rank.–  
(i) 
They shall retain rank (including temporary rank) held at the time 
their services are placed at the disposal of the Survey of Pakistan. 
(ii) 
The grant of time-scale substantive promotion during this period shall 
be governed by the normal army rules, as may be in force from time to 
time. Temporary promotions will be allowed on the basis of the ‗next 
below rule with the prior approval of the Military Secretary. 
(b)  Pay and Allowances (other than TA/DA).– They shall receive the pay and 
allowances (other than TA/DA) which they would have received in the 
army on duty. 
(c)  TA/DA.– They shall get TA and DA as are admissible to the officers of 
corresponding status in the Survey of Pakistan. 
(d) 
Pension.– Any claim that these officers or their families may have in 
respect of their disablement or death during this period of service with the 
Survey of Pakistan or arising out of any disability contracted in such 
service shall be determined solely in accordance with the Central Civil 
Services (Extraordinary Pension) Rules, or any modification or amendm-
ent to those rules for the time being in force, and the entire cost of meeting 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -287 
 
 
such claim shall be borne by the Survey of Pakistan. The Survey of 
Pakistan shall also be liable to pay the proportionate share of any service 
gratuity/pension that may be admissible to the officers in respect of their 
service with that Department. 
(e) 
House Rent.– Rent for accommodation provided by the government shall 
be recovered under the army rules. 
(f)  
Medical Treatment.– The officers and their families shall be entitled to the 
same medical facilities as their civilian counterparts in the Survey 
Department. 
 
(g)  Leave.– Leave shall be admissible as provided in the Military Leave 
Rules. 
 
(h)  Zonal Allowance.– The officers, if posted to the zone other than the zone 
of their domicile shall be entitled to receive a zonal allowance at the rate 
and subject to the conditions laid down by the Ministry of Defence. 
 
(i)  
Discipline.– For the purposes of discipline the officers shall be governed by 
the provisions of Rule 346 of the Army Regulation Volume I (Rules), 1960. 
 
(j)  
Confidential Reports.– Performance Evaluation Reports on the officers 
shall be rendered on the  same forms as are in use in the Survey of 
Pakistan. A copy of the report shall be sent to the Military Secretary. 
 
6. 
Rules Applicable After Confirmation.– The officers shall be released 
from the army without any pensionary benefits from the date of the confirmation in the 
Survey of Pakistan, and placed in the Pakistan Regular Reserve of Officers (PARRO) 
under the normal rules. 
 
7. 
Seniority.– On first appointment, an officer shall be appointed as Assistant 
Superintendent of Survey in the Central Service, Class I, of the Survey of Pakistan. His 
seniority in the Service shall count from his date of first commission, including antedate, 
if any. 
 
8. 
Recall to Active Duty.– If the service of any military officer transferred to 
the Survey of Pakistan are required by the Army the Commander-in-Chief, Pakistan Army, 
may, at discretion order his recall to the Army. 
 
9.  
Pay.– Their pay on confirmation in the Survey of Pakistan shall be fixed 
under F.R. 22. For this purpose, the pay in the Army shall be taken to include pay of rank, 
Staff/Command/ Charge/Instructional Pay, Qualification Pay and Disturbance Pay.  
 
10. 
Medical Treatment.– On confirmation in the Survey of Pakistan, the 
officers shall be entitled to medical treatment under the rules and on the scale applicable to 
officers of the Central Government paid from the civil estimates. 
 
11. 
Leave.– Officers permanently absorbed in the Survey of Pakistan shall be 
permitted to carry forward their privilege leave earned during Army service. 
                                                          
 BPS 17.  

Page -288                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
 
12. 
Confidential Reports.– 
Annual Confidential Reports on officers 
permanently absorbed in the Survey of Pakistan shall be rendered on the same forms as are 
in use in the Survey of Pakistan. 
 
13. 
 Option.– Army officers already transferred to the Survey of Pakistan shall 
have the option to accept the terms and conditions circulated to them vide Engineer-in-
Chief's Branch, General Headquarters O.M. No.1454/II/I/EI, dated 14th April 1952, or the 
new ones prescribed above. 
[Authority:– Food & Agriculture Division Notification No.S.R.O.81(K)/65, dated 22-1-1965]. 
9.3 
Use of Military Ranks by Military  
Personnel and Designation of  
Civil Employment 
 
Military personnel who are employed in civil posts may use their military ranks in 
conjunction with their signature on official documents in the manner illustrated below:- 
 
Major A.B.C. 
 
   or 
 
Lieutenant Commander A.B.C., P.N., 
 
   or 
 
Squadron Leader A.B.C., P.A.F. 
 
The rank and signature should, in each case, be followed by the designation in 
civil employment. 
 
2. The provisions of paragraph 1 do not apply to officers of the Regular, the 
Supplementary and the Volunteer Reserves of Officers and the Territorial Army. Such 
officers may use their military ranks with their signature on official documents only 
while they are serving in a military capacity with the Army, Navy or Air Force. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 6/4/61-F.I, dated 4-12-1961]. 
9.4 
Employment of Released/Retired Armed  
Forces Officers/ Personnel in Civil Posts 
 
The Ministry of Defence desires that they should be consulted in regard to the 
employment of released/retired military officers, in civil posts under the various 
Ministries/Divisions. Accordingly, it has been decided that whenever any Ministry/ 
Division, or any authority under them propose to employ a released/retired military 
officer as a result of an application made to them direct (and not through the Ministry of 
Defence) the Ministry of Defence should be consulted by the Ministry/Division etc. 
concerned before such an officer is employed by them.  The Ministry of Home Affairs 
                                                          
 Performance Evaluation Report.  

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -289 
 
 
etc. are, therefore, requested kindly to bring this decision to the notice of all concerned 
under them for their information and guidance. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 10/4/60-E.XIII, dated 3-6-1961]. 
 
9.5 
Employment of Armed Forces Officers/ 
Personnel – Provisions in Recruitment Rules 
 
Attention of the Ministries/Divisions is invited to the Establishment Division 
O.M. No. 10/5/60-D.V.,dated 6th November, 1962, and Memo. No.10/2/60-D.V, dated 
17th September, 1964. It is stated that in the light of the decisions contained therein 
provisions on the following lines may be made in the recruitment rules. 
(i) 
In Case of Ex-Cadre Gazetted Posts: 
 
―The maximum age limit will be relaxed in the case of released/ retired 
officers of the armed forces of Pakistan upto a maximum of 10 years or 
by the number of years an officer has actually served the armed forces, 
whichever is less.‖ 
(ii) 
In Case of Non-Gazetted Civil Posts which are Filled Otherwise Than by a 
Competitive Examination Held by FPSC: 
 
―The maximum age limit will be relaxed in the case of released/ retired 
personnel of the armed forces of Pakistan upto  a  maximum of 10 years or by 
the number of years a person has served the armed forces, whichever is less.‖ 
(iii) In Case of Both Ex-Cadre Gazetted Posts and Non-Gazetted Civil Posts: 
 
Released/retired officers/personnel of the armed forces will be preferred to 
candidates from the open market provided they possess the requisite 
educational and other qualifications and are otherwise suitable. 
Note.- 
For the purpose (i) above, ex-cadre posts means odd jobs or isolated posts. 
[Authority:– Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No. 5(1)/2/65-D.V., dated 10-3-1966]. 
9.6 
Employment of Ex-servicemen in  
Government Departments against  
Posts in BPS 1-4 
 
Attention is invited to the government decision notified in 1962 to the effect that 
in filling ex-cadre posts, released/retired officers of the armed forces should be preferred 
to candidates from the open market provided they possess the requisite educational and 
other qualifications and are otherwise suitable.  Instructions were also issued in 1964 for 
according preference to released/retired armed forces (Non- Commissioned) personnel 
for employment in civil posts over candidates from the open market provided they 
possessed the educational and other qualifications and were otherwise suitable. The 
instructions provide that the maximum age limit may be relaxed up to a maximum of 10 
years or the number of years a person has actually served in the Armed Forces whichever 

Page -290                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
is less.  In respect of Class IV jobs, and Class III posts of staff car drivers, the instructions 
provide for reservation of 50% vacancies for ex-servicemen. 
 
2. 
The Ministry of Defence have reported that despite these instructions, the 
efforts of GHQ to provide employment for the maximum number of ex-servicemen have 
not achieved the desired result.  The above instructions are brought to the notice of all 
Ministries/Divisions, the Attached Departments and the Subordinate Offices with the 
request that all appointing authorities should ensure strict observance of these instructions 
so that the maximum possible number of ex-servicemen are absorbed in civil posts. 
 
3. 
There may also be vacancies both under the Federal Government and the 
Provincial Governments for which suitably-qualified and experienced candidates from the 
open market may not be readily available. GHQ is of the view that released/retired armed 
forces personnel who are not only experienced, energetic, discipline and reliable but also 
dutiful and willing to work under abnormal conditions, can be suitably employed in the 
existing vacancies.  It is, therefore, requested that vacancies for which suitable 
departmental/direct recruits are not available should be reported to the Ministry of Defence, 
Rawalpindi, so that GHQ may be asked to provide a panel of suitable ex-servicemen for 
selection by the appointing authorities. 
 
4. 
The instructions in para 3 above do not apply to posts recruitment to 
which is required to be made, under the relevant rules, through the Federal Public Service 
Commission. All vacancies in such posts should continue to be reported to the 
Commission. The eligible ex-servicemen may apply direct to the Commission when the 
posts are advertised. However, the Ministries/Divisions and the various Departments 
under them some time do make ad-hoc appointments against posts which are normally 
required to be filled through the Federal Public Service Commission, subject to 
replacement by the Federal Public Service Commission nominees and in accordance with 
the instructions regarding ad-hoc appointments issued by Establishment Division from 
time to time.  It is requested that particulars of vacancies which are intended to be filled 
on ad-hoc basis, by appointment of persons not already serving in the department, may 
also be communicated to Ministry of Defence.  The ex-servicemen, if appointed on ad-
hoc basis, shall be subject to replacement by the F.P.S.C. nominees. 
 
5. 
It is also requested that suitable instructions may be issued by the 
Ministries/Divisions to the various autonomous bodies and semi-autonomous bodies 
under them to employ ex-servicemen in as large a number as possible and for this 
purpose, details of the posts and the qualifications and experience required may be 
communicated to Ministry of Defence so that names of suitable ex-serving officers and 
men may be communicated to them for selection. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 17/1/68-D.III, dated 18-10-1971]. 
9.7 
Employment of Ex-Servicemen and  
Pakistan Armed Services Board (PASB) 
 
In supersession of the existing practice when a vacancy occurs against the quota 
reserved for ex-servicemen, the demand for filling in such a vacancy should be placed on 
the Pakistan Armed Services Board Secretariat in the Ministry of Defence. The P.A.S.B. 
Secretariat will meet the required demand from its own pool or its Provincial Directorate.  
In case an ex-serviceman with the required qualifications etc. is not available, the 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -291 
 
 
P.A.S.B. Secretariat will inform the department, who has placed the demand of the 
non-availability of such a person. 
 
2. 
A copy of the Defence Division Office Memo No. 52/D. 14(W)/1177/76, 
dated  30th September, 1976 is enclosed (Annex) for further guidance in the matter. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 14/l/76-D. III, dated 4-6-1976]. 
 
(ANNEX) 
 
[Copy of Government of Pakistan, Ministry of Defence (Defence Division), 
Rawalpindi, O.M. No. 52/D-14 (W)/1177/76, dated the 30th September, 1976]. 
 
Reference is invited to the Establishment Division O.M.No. 14/1/76-D.III, dated 
the 4th June 1976 under which demand for re-employment of ex-servicemen are to be 
placed on the Pakistan Armed Services Board, Ministry of Defence, GHQ, Rawalpindi. 
The Board is in the process of instituting a system for providing suitable ex-servicemen 
for the required jobs.  It will be appreciated that to meet the demand for re-employment 
of ex-servicemen at least one month's time is needed to enable the Board to call up 
candidates from their villages, conduct their interviews, select suitable personnel and 
forward their names to the requisitioning departments. At present the requisitioning 
departments are giving the Pakistan Armed Services Board only 3 to 4 days time within 
which all these formalities are to be completed.  It is well nigh impossible to complete the 
required formalities within such a short time. 
 
2.  
In case the demand is large it would always be available for the 
requisitioning departments to contact the Pakistan Armed Services Board and its subordinate 
offices at the provincial/district level, seek their advice and chalk out a coordinated plan for 
the accomplishment of the task. 
 
3. 
It is requested that the Federal Ministries/Divisions may kindly be advised to 
instruct the departments/organizations under their control to allow a minimum period of one 
month to the Pakistan Armed Services Board for providing the names of suitable 
ex-servicemen for re-employment. 
9.8 
Reservation of 50% Vacancies in BPS 1-3  
and in BPS 4 of Staff Car Driver/Despatch  
Rider for Armed Forces Personnel 
 
Reference Establishment Division Office Memorandum No. 25/86/52-SE I, 
dated the 10th November, 1953. The decision contained in the Office Memorandum under 
reference has recently been reviewed by government and it has now been decided that 
50% of the vacancies in Class IV posts and the Class III posts of Staff Car Driver should 
be reserved for discharged, retired or demobilized armed forces personnel. The remaining 
50% vacancies should be treated as open to all.  However, ex-armed forces personnel 
may compete alongwith others for these vacancies as well. 
                                                          
 Now Category-IV.  

Page -292                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
 
2. 
It is clarified for information of all the Ministries/Divisions that the posts 
of Despatch Riders in BPS 4 are governed by the above instructions as well as those 
contained in this Division circulars issued subsequently. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 1/8/58-D.V., dated 19-10-1962 and 
 Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 14/4/75-D. III, dated 31-3-1976]. 
9.9 
Employment of Ex-Servicemen from Other  
Regions if Locally Not Available 
 
According to the existing instructions, the vacancies reserved for ex-servicemen 
should not be filled by other persons unless the employing authority obtains a certificate 
from the Welfare and Rehabilitation Directorate, General Headquarters, Rawalpindi to 
the effect that suitable ex-servicemen are not available for employment. The vacancies in 
some of these grades are filled locally. 
 
2. 
It has now been decided that if ex-servicemen are not available locally the 
vacancies reserved for them may be filled by ex-servicemen from other regions. 
 [Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 14/l/74-D.III, dated 23-12-1975]. 
 
 
9.10 Submission of Returns in Respect of Employment 
of Released/ Retired Armed Forces Personnel 
 
The Ministries/Divisions were directed vide Establishment Division Office 
Memoranda No. 1/18/58 D.V., dated 19th October, 1962, No. 1/14/63-D.V., dated 28th 
February, 1964 and No. 1/14/63-D.V., dated 14th January, 1965 that 50% of the 
vacancies in BPS 1 to 3 posts and the posts of Staff Car Drivers (in BPS 4) should be 
reserved for discharge/ retired or demobilized armed forces personnel, and the procedure 
to be followed in this connection was described. 
 
2. 
The Ministries/Divisions are requested that a half yearly return relating to 
the main Ministry/Division, its Departments and offices giving the following information 
in respect of grades 1 to 4 should be sent to the Establishment Division on 31st July and 
31st January:— 
 
 
(1) Grade*. 
 
(2) Total number of posts. 
 
(3) Total number of ex-servicemen in the grade*. 
 
(4) Number of vacancies occurred during the preceding six months. 
 
(5) Number of vacancies filled in. 
 
(6) Number of ex-servicemen employed during the preceding six 
months. 
 
(7) In case ex-servicemen are not appointed against the vacancies 
reserved for them, the reasons therefor. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 17/l/68-D. III, dated 9-5-1974 read with O.M. of even 
number dated 22-6-1974]. 
                                                          
 BPS. 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -293 
 
 
 
9.11 
*Induction/Re-employment of  
Officers of Armed Forces of  
Pakistan in Civil Posts 
 
The question of institutionalizing the induction and re-employment of officers of 
the armed forces of Pakistan in civil posts has been under consideration for some time 
past. The President has now been pleased to decide that induction of officers of the armed 
forces of Pakistan and their re-employment, as the case may be, shall be regulated by the 
following instructions:- 
PART-I 
 
2. 
Induction of young officers of armed forces of Pakistan upto 8 years 
commissioned service in civil posts shall be made in accordance with Part II. 
 
3. 
Induction of officers of the rank of Major or equivalent who may retire or 
may have retired on completion of the prescribed age or service limit shall be made in 
accordance with Part III. 
 
4. 
Re-employment of officers of the rank of Major or equivalent who may 
retire or may have retired before completion of the prescribed age or service limit and of 
retired officers of the rank of Lieutenant Colonel and above and equivalent shall be made in 
accordance with Part IV. 
PART-II 
 
5. 
Young officers of the armed forces upto 8 years of commissioned service 
will be eligible for induction in **grade 17 on regular basis upto 10% of the annual direct 
recruitment vacancies in the specified occupational groups direct recruitment to which is 
made through the combined competitive examination held by the FPSC annually. 
 
6. 
Induction will be made through the High Powered Selection Board constituted 
by the President for the purpose. The High Powered Selection Board will also determine the 
Occupational Groups to which the officers are allocated. For this purpose, each Service Chief 
may be asked to recommend by the 30th June every year names of officers for induction in 
grade 17 in various groups, keeping in view their educational qualifications and experience. 
For each vacancy, a panel of preferably 3 officers may be recommended.  The 
recommendations will be scrutinised by the Ministry of Defence before they are placed before 
the Board. 
 
7. 
Officers inducted in various groups will be adjusted against vacancies 
allocated to the province or provinces to which they belong. 
 
8. 
The officers will be appointed on regular basis, and the probation period 
shall be deemed to have been waived. On appointment to the civil post, the officers will 
sever their connection with the armed forces. 
                                                          
* [Note.- The instructions reproduced under this Serial Number may please be read with subsequent 
amendments/clarifications]. 
 BPS. 

Page -294                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
 
9. 
The officers will receive the same training as is given to the probationers 
appointed on the results of the competitive examination held by the FPSC and will be 
required to pass completely the prescribed examinations during or on conclusion of the 
training.  Their promotion to the higher grade will be governed by normal rules, and will 
be subject to the further condition that they have completely passed the prescribed 
examinations during or on conclusion of the training.  
 
10. 
The inducted officers will count their seniority from the year in which they 
are inducted, recruits of the same year retaining their seniority, inter se. They will be 
placed above the competitioners of the year with whom they receive the training. 
 
11.  (a)  
The pay of the inducted officers in civil *grade will be fixed on the 
basis of their pay in the substantive rank or temporary rank, if held 
for one year. 
 
        (b)  
Service rendered in Armed Forces will count towards civil pension. 
PART-III 
 
12. 
The officers of the rank of Major and equivalent who may retire or may 
have retired on completion of the prescribed age or service limit will be eligible for 
induction in *grade 18 on regular basis upto 10% of the annual vacancies in the various 
groups and cadres in that *grade, as may be specified. 
 
13. 
Induction will be made through the High Powered Selection Board in 
accordance with the procedure laid down in para 6. 
 
14. 
In selecting officers for induction, provincial quotas will be kept in view. 
 
15. 
The inducted officers will count seniority in the *grade in which they are 
inducted from the date of their induction. 
 
16. 
The pay of inducted officers will be fixed in the civil *grade on the basis 
of their pay of the substantive rank or temporary rank, if held for one year. 
 
17. 
The inducted officers will continue to draw their military pension but it 
shall be deducted from the civil pay.  In addition to the military pension, the officers will 
be entitled to a civil pension on their retirement from civil employment if they have 
completed the prescribed qualifying service (i.e. 10 years of minimum service).  They 
will be entitled to receive gratuity if they have rendered more than 5 years and less than 
10 years of service in the civil post. 
PART-IV 
 
18. 
Officers of the rank of Major/ equivalent who retire or may have retired before 
completion of the prescribed age or service limit and officers of the rank of Lieutenant 
Colonel and above and equivalent who may retire or may have retired either after completion 
of prescribed service or age limit or before such completion will be eligible for 
re-employment on contract for 3 to 5 years, renewable upto the age of 60, upto the maximum 
of 10% of annual vacancies in various groups and cadres, as may be specified, on the terms 
and conditions mentioned hereinafter. 
                                                          
 BPS. 
 Please see revised instructions vide Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.1/19/80-IC.I, dated 4-12-1980.  

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -295 
 
 
 
19. 
Re-employment will be made in grades equivalent to their substantive 
rank, or temporary rank, if held for one year, in accordance with the Army rank-civil 
grade equivalence formula already approved by the President. However, the officers will 
be eligible for being considered for a subsequent contract in higher grade. 
 
[Re-employment of officers may be considered for a higher grade* either at 
the time of subsequent contract or after completing service of three years in the existing 
contract whichever is earlier]. 
 
20. 
Re-employment on contract basis will be made through the High Powered 
Selection Board which will also determine the group or cadre in which re-employment is 
to be made. The procedure for selection will be the same as prescribed in para 6. 
 
21. 
In selecting officers for re-employment provincial quotas will be kept in view. 
 
22. 
Re-employment on contract in various *grades shall be made by the 
authorities competent to make appointment to these *grades in accordance with rule 6 of 
the Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973. 
 
23. 
The re-employed officers will be eligible for such training as is given to 
their civilian counterparts. 
 
24. 
Re-employed officers will not have any seniority and will not be placed on 
the regular Seniority list. 
 
[25.  Pay of the retired officers of the armed forces, who are re-employed in 
civil posts on contract in *grades equal to the substantive rank or temporary rank, if held 
for one year, may be fixed at the minimum of the grade in which re-employment is made 
and full service pension should be paid in addition.  Service rendered on civil side shall 
not qualify for a second pension.] 
 
26. 
The armed forces officers re-employed on contract shall be liable to serve 
anywhere within or outside Pakistan, in any post under the Federal Government or 
Provincial Government or local authorities, or a corporation or body set up or established 
by such government provided that nothing contained in this paragraph shall apply to an 
officer re-employed specifically to serve in a particular area or region and further provided 
that where such an officer is required to serve in a post other than the post in which he has 
been re-employed, his terms and conditions of service as to his pay shall not be less 
favourable than those to which he would have been entitled if he had not been so required 
to serve. 
                                                          
 BPS/post. 
 Added vide Estt. Division O.M.No.1(25)/80-IC.I, dated 7.3.1982. 
 Substituted vide Estt.  Division‘s O.M. No. 14/5/78-D.III, dated 5-5-1980. 

Page -296                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
 
27. [Omitted]. 
 
 28.*[In case no orders are received by the date on which the contractual period 
expires the contract shall be deemed to have been terminated; unless otherwise ordered]. 
 
29. 
The conduct of re-employed contract officer shall be regulated by rules 
made, or deemed to have been made or instructions issued, by Government or a 
prescribed authority as for civil servants under section 15 of the Civil Servants Act, 1973. 
 
30.  A re-employed contract officer shall be liable to such disciplinary action and 
penalties in accordance with the rules made or deemed to have been made under section 16 of 
the Civil Servants Act, 1973. 
 
31. 
The armed forces officers re-employed on contract shall be governed by 
the leave rules contained in the Finance Division O.M. No. F. 1(2)-Rev. I/78, dated the 
21st September, 1978 (Note 1 &2 below).  However, provisions contained in para 3(ii) 
and (iii), 5, 6, 10, 11 and 17 shall not apply. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Note 1: The Revised Leave Rules, 1980 will be applicable. Leave Rules, 1978: 3(ii) 
(Leave on half Pay) (iii) Leave Preparatory to Retirement, 5 (Leave not due), 6 
(Special Leave); 11 (Extraordinary Leave, Leave Without Pay), 10 (Encashment 
of refused leave); 12 (In-service death), 17 (Authorities refusing leave 
preparatory to retirement).  
Note 2:  Revised Leave Rules, 1980: 6 (Leave on half pay), 9 (Extraordinary Leave, 
Leave without pay), 11 (Leave not due), 12 (Special leave), 16 (Leave 
preparatory to retirement),17 (Encashment of refused leave Preparatory to 
retirement),18 (Power to refuse leave preparatory to retirement)18-A 
(Encashment of leave preparatory to retirement) 19 (In-service death)]. 
 
32. 
The leave at the credit on an officer shall be carried forward in case a 
contract is extended without any interruption. However, all leave at the credit of an 
officer shall lapse on the date of final expiry or termination of the contract. 
 
33. 
The officer will be entitled to T.A. on tour and transfer and to medical 
attendance and treatment on the scale applicable to civil servants of corresponding grade. 
 
34. 
Where a right to prefer an appeal or apply of review in respect of any order 
relating to the terms and conditions of his service is provided to an officer of armed forces 
re-employed on contract under any rules made applicable to him such appeal or application 
shall, except as may be otherwise prescribed, be made within thirty days or the date of such 
order. 
 
35. 
Where no provision for appeal or review exists under the rules in respect 
of any order or class of orders, a re-employed officer aggrieved by any such order may, 
within thirty days of the communication to him of such order made a representation 
against it to the authority next above the authority which made the order. 
 
36. 
The existing officers of the category mentioned in this part who have already 
been appointed on contract in civil posts shall be eligible to elect terms and conditions 
                                                          
 Omitted & substituted vide Estt. Division‘s O.M.No. 1(3)/86/CP-6, dated 1-1-1987. 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -297 
 
 
specified in this part.  They shall be required to give their option either to elect their existing 
conditions of appointment or to elect the terms and conditions laid down in this part for the 
remaining period of their contract.  The option shall be given within two months of the date of 
issue of this O.M. They will be brought on the terms and conditions laid down in this part with 
effect from 23rd December, 1979, the date on which the President was pleased to approve the 
scheme.  Those who fail to submit their option by the prescribed date shall be deemed to have 
elected their existing terms and conditions.  Option shall be final. 
PART-V 
 
37. 
Any major difficulties in implementing these decisions will be resolved by 
reference to a committee comprising Establishment Secretary, Finance Secretary and Law 
Secretary.  The reference will be made through the Establishment Division, who will initially 
examine it and in case they are unable to remove the difficulty, the matter will be placed 
before the Committee. 
 
38. 
This Office Memorandum issued with the concurrence of the Ministry of 
Finance.  
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 14/5/78-D. III, dated 10-2-1980]. 
 
9.12 Application of Instructions for Induction/ 
Re-employment of Armed Forces Officers  
to Autonomous Bodies 
 
The President has also been pleased to decide that instructions contained in the 
Establishment Division O.M. No. 14/5/78-D. III, dated 10th February, 1980 will also 
apply, mutatis mutandis to the corporations and other autonomous bodies set up by the 
Federal Government or working under their administrative control. 
 
2.  
All Ministries/Divisions are requested to advise the corporations and other 
autonomous bodies under their administrative control to draw instructions for induction 
or re-employment of officers of armed forces of Pakistan in various posts in the 
corporations on the lines of the instructions contained in the office memorandum under 
reference and issue them with the approval of the competent authority. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 14/5/78-D.III, dated 11-2-1980]. 
9.13 Guidelines for Re-employment  
of Retired Armed Forces Officers 
As per policy circulated vide Establishment Division‘s O.M. No. 14 (5)/78-D-
III, dated 10-02-1980 as amended from time to time, the retired officers of the armed 
forces are eligible for re-employment, on the recommendations of the DSOSB, against 
10% of the annual vacancies, in the specified Ministries/ Divisions/Departments/ Service 
Groups of the Federal Government as per procedure/instructions outlined therein. 
Separate Selection Boards are set up in the Provincial Governments and in the 
                                                          
 For amendments in this O.M. No. 14/5/78-D.III, dated 10-02-1980, see subsequent Sl. Nos. 9.12 to 9.26. 

Page -298                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
corporations and autonomous/semi-autonomous bodies to select suitable retired officers 
of the armed forces for re-employment under these governments/corporations etc. 
 
2.  
The competent authority has been pleased to approve the following further 
guidelines on the subject:— 
(i) 
As a matter of principle, all requests for re-employment of retired officers 
of the armed forces may invariably be sent to the Services HQ for proper 
scrutiny & placing before the DSOSB as per policy and individual 
requests may not be entertained. As per its existing charter, the Defence 
Services Officers Selection Board (DSOSB) shall consider cases strictly 
against 
10% 
annual 
vacancies 
in 
the 
specified 
departments/ 
organizations/groups/ services listed in Annex. 
(ii) 
Employments/re-employments of defence services officers in civil over 
and above 10% annual vacancies quota shall continue to be processed by 
the Establishment Division in coordination with the Defence Division and 
Services Headquarters/W&R Dte. of GHQ, after such proposals are 
cleared by the Prime Minister of Pakistan on merit of each case, and in the 
public interest. 
 
3.  
It is requested that these instructions/guidelines may be noted for strict 
compliance and circulated amongst all the departments/ organizations/ groups services 
etc. working under the Ministries/Divisions of the Federal Government/Provincial 
Governments for similar action. 
[Authority: Establishment Division‘s O.M. No. 3/69/2000-CP-7, dated 27-03-2001] 
ANNEX 
 
LIST OF SPECIFIED MINISTRIES/DIVISIONS/SERVICES GROUPS 
 
1. 
Office Management Group (OMG) 
 
(BPS 18 only) 
2. 
Secretariat Group 
 
 
 
(BPS 19 & above) 
3. 
Information Group  
 
 
-do- 
4. 
Foreign Service of Pakistan  
 
-do- 
5. 
Ministry of Education 
 
 
-do- 
6. 
Ministry of Health  
 
 
-do- 
7. 
Ministry of Communications  
 
-do- 
8. 
Intelligence Bureau (I.B) 
 
 
-do- 
9. 
Ministry of Railways 
 
 
-do- 
 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -299 
 
 
9.14 Inclusion of Commissioned Service  in Armed  
Forces in Length of Service in Civil Posts 
 
Under the existing policy army service does not reckon for the purpose of move-
over in respect of the officers inducted in civil posts on regular basis under Part-II of induction 
policy circulated vide Establishment Division's O.M.No.14/5/78-D.III, dated 10-2-1980. The 
matter has been examined in consultation with the Establishment Division and decided that 
the commissioned service rendered by an officer in the armed forces prior to induction into 
the civil post on regular basis under Part-II of Induction Policy, referred to above, may be 
included in the length of service for the purpose of grant of move-over subject to the 
following conditions:- 
 (i) 
There is no break in service between the previous commissioned service 
rendered by them in the existing government department besides such 
commissioned service has also been counted towards fixation of pay in the 
existing government department. 
(ii) 
He is not drawing pension against the service rendered in the armed 
forces. 
 
[Authority:– Finance Division‘s O.M.No.F.6(12)-R-3/89-Imp-I, dated 31-10-1990]. 
 
9.15 Secondment/Re-employment of Armed  
 
 
Forces Officers in Civil 
 
Refer to Establishment Division‘s Office Memorandum No. 4/1/2008-E.4 dated 30-
05-2008 on the subject noted above and to say that secondment of Armed Forces Officers in 
civil Organizations:— 
a) 
That they would be second to civil posts where their role is essentially required 
due to special expertise in particular field, and similar expertise cannot be 
procured from other sources. The post that will be vacated after reversion of 
officers from secondment shall be filled through promotion/transfer/recruitment 
etc by the respective Ministries/ Divisions /Organizations, as prescribed.  
b) Secondment of Armed Forces Officers would be allowed only against the 
earmarked posts, and all cases of secondment shall be routed through 
Establishment Division.  
c) 
Any new proposal/request for secondment against posts other than the 
earmarked ones would be dealt with in accordance with the revised policy, and 
will require prior approval of the Prime Minister. The organization requesting 
for secondment shall give complete justification for their proposal and shall 
clarify that requisite expertise is not available on the civil side.  
d) The re-employment/contract appointment of retired Armed Forces officers shall 
be made against 10% quota reserved in the specified Divisions/Occupational 
Groups through High Powered Selection Board, as prescribed in Establishment 
                                                          
 Pak. Army, PAF & Pak Navy to be read in view of the words ‗armed forces‘ used. 

Page -300                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
Division O.M No. 14/5/78-D-III dated 10/02/1980 and No. 3/69/2000-CP-7, 
dated 27-03-2001. 
e) 
In case of the posts earmarked for secondment, it will be allowed in exceptional 
cases only after approval of the Prime Minister.  
f) 
Where a particular expertise is not available through ordinary means, retired 
officers of the Armed Forces may be selected through open competition after 
advertisement of the posts.  
[Authority:— Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 4/18/2008-E-4 dated 06-11-2008. 
   
9.16 Pay Fixation and Seniority of  
Armed Forces Officers Inducted  
in Civil Posts 
 
 
The question of pay-fixation and seniority of the armed forces officers inducted 
on permanent basis into the civil in various groups prior to the promulgation of the 
induction policy, vide this Division's O.M. of even number dated 10th February, 1980 has 
been under consideration of the government. It has now been decided that pay-fixation 
and seniority of such officers will be determined on the following conditions:— 
(i) 
These officers will be deemed to have been inducted into their respective 
groups with effect from the date they started officiating against posts in 
the said groups on transfer from the army. 
(ii) 
They will count their seniority in the relevant grades with effect from the 
date of induction. 
(iii) Their pay and allowances will be fixed in civil scales of pay in accordance 
with the rules on the subject. 
(iv) In the case of officers who have continued to draw army pay, their present 
pay will be fixed after allowing them due increments. They will cease to 
draw army pay and allowances with effect from 1st  August, 1981. 
(v) 
Any pay and allowances drawn in excess of the civil rates of pay between 
the date of their induction and 1st August, 1981 will be written off. 
 
2. 
The above conditions will also apply to those Defence Services Officers 
inducted in various groups who have already retired from Defence Service. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.14/5/78-D.II.I dated 14-7-1981]. 
9.17 Eligibility of Major/Equivalent Retired  
on Medical Grounds for Induction in  
Posts in BPS 18/Equivalent 
 
Reference Part-III, para 12 of Establishment Division's Office Memorandum of 
even number dated 10th  February, 1980 the President has been pleased to decide that 
officers of the rank of Major or equivalent retiring on medical grounds (Category C) 
before attaining the specified length of service/age will also be eligible for induction in 
grade 18 on regular basis in the various specified groups and cadres. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M. No.14/5/78-D.III, dated 16-7-1981]. 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -301 
 
 
9.18 Resignation by Armed Forces 
Officers Inducted in Civil Posts 
 
According to para 27, Part IV of Estt. Division's O.M. No.14/5/78-D.  III, dated 
10th February, 1980 termination of contract, either on expiry of contract or otherwise, is 
to be done through the High Powered Selection Board. 
 
2. 
The President has been pleased to decide that resignations tendered by 
contract officers need not be processed through the Defence Services Officers Selection 
Board and that such resignations should be submitted to the competent authority for 
acceptance without referring them to the aforesaid Board. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s  O.M. No. 1(19)/80-I.C.I. dated 11-8-1981]. 
9.19 Pay Fixation of Armed Forces  
Officers Inducted in Civil Posts 
 
Reference Establishment Division's O.M.No.14/5/78-D.3, dated 10th February, 1980 
in modification of para 16, Part III, of Estt. Division's O.M. referred to above, the President 
has been pleased to decide that the pay of serving officers of the armed forces of the rank of 
Major and equivalent inducted in civil posts on permanent basis, will be fixed as follows:— 
(a) 
These officers will be allowed to get their army pay and allowances during 
the period of their training except kit allowances; and 
(b) 
On the termination of their training and on regular posting their pay will 
be fixed in civil post in NPS-18 on the basis of their pay of substantive 
rank or temporary rank if held for one year, including the following as part 
of pay: 
(i) 
Disturbance pay. 
(ii) 
Qualification pay. 
(iii)  Command/Staff/Charge pay. 
 [Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 8(4)/81-CP.V, dated 11-1-1983]. 
9.20 Termination of Contract of Armed  
Forces Officers in Civil Posts 
 
Reference is invited to Establishment Division's O.M. No. 14/5/78-D III, dated 
10th February, 1980. It is stated that the Prime Minister has been pleased to direct that the 
following amendments shall be made in the said office memorandum, namely:— 
(a) 
Para 27 in Part IV shall be omitted, and 
(b) 
for para 28, the following shall be substituted:- 
 
―In case no orders are received by the date on which the contractual period 
expires, the contract shall be deemed to have been terminated, unless 
otherwise ordered.‖ 
                                                          
 BPS. 

Page -302                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
 
2. 
To avoid any hardship to officers affected by the amendment in para 28 of the 
said memorandum, the Prime Minister has been pleased to direct that the said amendment 
shall not apply to officers whose contractual period has either expired or would expire within 
3 months from the date of issue of this amendment but no orders extending or terminating 
such contracts have been received by the Ministries/ Divisions. 
 
3.  
The Ministries/Divisions are requested to identify and submit such cases, 
alongwith their recommendations, to the Establishment Division within the next fortnight for 
placing them before the Defence Services Officers Selection Board and obtaining orders of 
the competent authority. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.1(3)86-CP-6, dated 1-1-1987]. 
9.21 
Application of Instructions for Induction/Re-employment of 
Armed Forces Officers in Autonomous Bodies – Amendment 
in Recruitment Rules 
 
With reference to the Establishment Division O.M. No.14/5/78-D. III, dated the 
11th February, 1980 it is stated that the instructions contained in Estt. Division's O.M. of 
even number, dated the 1st January, 1987 will also apply, mutatis mutandis, to the 
corporations and autonomous bodies set up by the Federal Government or working under 
their administrative control. 
 
2. 
All Ministries/Divisions are requested to advise the corporations and other 
autonomous bodies under their administrative control to make necessary amendments to 
the instructions issued by them for induction or re-employment of officers of armed 
forces of Pakistan in various posts in the corporations. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.1(3)/86-CP.6,dated 14-1-1987]. 
9.22 
Induction/Re-employment of Armed Forces Officers  
in Civil Posts – Specification of Groups and Cadres 
 
 
Under Establishment Division's O.M.No.14/5/78-D.III, dated 10th February, 
1980 10% of the annual vacancies in the specified Occupational Groups and cadres are 
required to be filled by the retired officers of the armed forces of Pakistan. Groups and 
cadres to which these officers can be appointed have now been specified. It has been 
decided that: 
(a) 
Except the following, all Occupational Groups will be open to the armed 
forces officers for induction/re-employment in Grade 17 and 18:— 
(i) 
Economists and Planners Group. 
(ii) 
Commerce and Trade Group. 
(iii) Office Management Group. 
(b) 
The following Groups only will be open for appointment in **Grades 19 
and above:— 
                                                          
 Add ―and Service‖ 
 Note: For revised instructions, please see Sl.No. 9.21. 
 BPS. 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -303 
 
 
(1) 
Secretariat Group. 
(2) 
Foreign Affairs Group. 
(3) 
Information Group. 
(4) 
Accounts Group (for those Officers only who have experience of 
Finance and Accounts). 
 
2. 
At present, the Defence Services Officers Selection Board headed by the 
Minister for Interior is required to select officers of the armed forces for induction/ 
re-employment in civil posts in the Federal Government, Provincial Governments, 
corporations and autonomous/ semi-autonomous bodies set up or established by such 
governments. It has been felt that there is a need to decentralize the powers for effective 
implementation of the policy regarding induction/ re-employment of the officers of the 
armed forces. It has therefore, been decided that:— 
(a) 
The Defence Services Officers Selection Board should restrict itself to 
select officers only for the All Pakistan Unified Grades and the Federal 
Unified Grades. 
(b) 
Separate Selection Boards should be set up in the Provincial Governments 
to select retired officers of the defence forces for re-employment under 
those governments. 
(c) 
Separate Selection Boards should also be set up for re-employment of 
such officers in the corporations and autonomous/semi-autonomous 
bodies. These Boards will be headed by the Minister of the administrative 
Ministry (Division) concerned and should include the Secretary of that 
Ministry/Division and the Chairman/ Managing Director of the corpora-
tion concerned. 
 
3. 
Each Ministry and the Provincial Governments will intimate the number 
of vacancies allocated/reserved for the Armed Forces Officers by the 30th June each year 
to the Ministry of Defence under intimation to this Division.  Ministry of Defence will 
recommend/propose a panel of names of the Armed Forces Officers, to be considered for 
appointment to the posts. Preferably three names should be recommended/proposed for 
each vacancy.  This Division shall also be informed of the final selection made. 
 
4. 
The Ministries/Divisions and the Provincial Governments are requested to 
take immediate action for implementing these decisions. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 1/22/80-Ind.-Cell, dated 29-11-1980]. 
9.23 
Induction/Re-employment of Armed Forces Officers 
in Civil Posts : Specification of Groups@ 
 
In partial modification of Establishment Division O.M. No.14/5/78-D.Ill, dated 
10th February, 1980 it has been decided that; 
                                                          
 Now Foreign Service of Pakistan vide Notification No. SRO 936(1)/83 dated 29.9.1983. 
 Now Pakistan Audit & Accounts Service vide Estt. Div.‘s OM No. 1/17/92-CP II dated 10th December, 2002. 
All Pakistan Services (Change in Nomenclature) Rules, 1973, notified vide SRO 1307(I)/73 dated 14-09-
1973, have been repealed vide SRO 89(I)/2014 dated 14-02-2014, whereby all Notifications and instructions 
issued on the subject from time to time were mutatis mutandis amended.   
@ Read ‗Services‘ and ‗Group‘. 

Page -304                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
(i) 
In future, the induction of serving officers of the armed forces of Pakistan 
will be confined only to PAS, FSP and Police Group in **Grade 17 posts 
against the following annual intake:- 
 
 
Pakistan Administrative Service.... 
5 
 
        Foreign Affairs Group....... 
3 
 
       *Police Group................. 
2 
 
 (ii) No induction of serving armed forces officers in **Grade 17 & 18 will be 
made in any other occupational group or service in the Federal 
Government or provincial Governments. 
(iii) Annual induction in **Grade-18 will not be a regular feature but a limited 
number of serving Majors or equivalent rank may be chosen by the 
President. Such cases will be processed through the Defence Services 
Officers Selection Board and put upto the President for approval. 
(iv) Retired officers of the rank of Major or equivalent will be eligible for 
appointment only in autonomous bodies/ corporations either on contract or 
regular induction according to the option of the officers.  They will also be 
eligible for appointment on contract basis against 10% vacancies of 
Section Officers in **Grade-18 in the Federal Secretariat. 
(v) 
Existing retired officers of the rank of the Major or equivalent, who have 
been inducted as Section Officers in the Federal Secretariat may also 
exercise the option for employment on contract basis for an initial period 
of three years with immediate effect. The last date for exercising this 
option is 31st March, 1982. 
[Authority:– Estt.  Div.‘s O.M. No. 1/19/80-IC(Pt)/CP-5, dated 1-3-1982]. 
9.24 
Induction of Armed Forces Officers  
in Civil Posts – Modification in Instructions 
 
In partial modification of Part III of the Estt. Division's O.M.No. 14/5/78-D.III, 
dated 10th February, 1980 on the subject, it has been decided that: 
 (a) The officers of the rank of Major and equivalent, who may retire or may 
have retired on completion of the prescribed age or service limit, will be 
eligible only for induction in **Grade 18 on regular basis in civil posts 
under the Federal Government and Provincial Governments upto 10% of 
the annual vacancies in the various groups/cadres, as may be specified. 
(b) 
The officers of the rank of Major and equivalent who may retire, or may 
have retired on completion of the prescribed age or service limit will be 
eligible also for induction on regular basis as well as re-employment on 
                                                          
 Police Service of Pakistan. 
** BPS. 
 Foreign Service of Pakistan. 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -305 
 
 
contract in Grade-18 or equivalent posts in corporations and autonomous/ 
semi-autonomous bodies under the Federal and Provincial Governments 
upto 10% of the annual vacancies. Both the regular induction and 
re-employment on contract will be made on recommendations of the High 
Powered Selection Board. 
(c) 
If selected for appointment to posts in corporations or autonomous/ 
semi-autonomous bodies, the officers will be asked to exercise an option 
whether they want to be re-employed on contract or permanently inducted 
on regular basis upto the age of superannuation. Option once exercised 
shall be final. 
(d) 
Such officers as are re-employed on contract will be governed by the 
terms and conditions mentioned in Part IV of the Establishment Division 
O.M. referred to above. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.1/19/80-IC-I,dated 4-12-1980]. 
9.25 
Extension in Re-employment on  
Contract of Armed Forces Officers 
 
Attention is invited to the Establishment Division's Office Memorandum No. 
14/5/78-D.III, dated 10th February, 1980, as amended from time to time. It is stated that 
according to the existing instructions all cases of induction/ re-employment on contract of 
serving retired officers of the armed forces in civil posts are required to be processed 
through the Defence Services Officers' Selection Board. It has now been decided by the 
Prime Minister that cases of extension in contract re-employment should also be 
processed through the Board. 
 
2. 
Cases for extension in contract re-employment are placed before the Board 
after obtaining a panel of two or more officers in each case from the Ministry of Defence. 
The Board considers such cases in the light of recommendations of the administrative 
Ministries/Divisions/Departments, performance/ service record of the officer and 
exigencies of the service.  Recording of minutes of the meetings and completion of other 
formalities such as submission of summaries to the Prime Minister and soliciting his 
orders take sufficiently long time.  According to amended para-28 of the Policy vide 
Establishment Division's Office Memorandum of even number dated 01-01-1987 if no 
orders are received by the date on which the contractual period expires, the contract is 
deemed to have been terminated.  It is also not possible to convene the meetings of the 
Board frequently and at a short notice. 
 
3. 
To ensure that cases of extension in contract re-employment are finalized 
before the maturity of contract appointments, it is imperative that such cases should be 
initiated well in advance. 
 
4. 
In view of the position explained above, all Ministries/ Divisions/ 
Departments are advised to submit cases of extension in contract re-employment of 
retired officers of armed forces at least four months in advance of the date of expiry of 
contract, to ensure timely decision. 
 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.1(3)/88-CP.6, dated 14-3-1988]. 
                                                          
 BPS. 

Page -306                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
9.26 
Induction/Re-employment of Armed  
Forces Officers into Civil Posts 
 
The methodology of induction of officers of the armed forces in civil remained 
under active consideration of the Establishment Division. The issue was also examined 
thoroughly by the Recruitment Policy Committee. On the recommendations of the 
Recruitment Policy Committee, the Prime Minister has been pleased to approve as 
under:— 
(a) 
Officers of the armed forces, irrespective of their rank, will be eligible for 
induction in the civil to posts in pay scale 17 only provided– 
(i) 
their overall service record in the armed forces is not below ―High 
Average‖ and 
(ii) 
they are below 32 years of age. 
(b) 
Induction will be allowed only in the following occupational groups:— 
(i) 
Pakistan Administrative Service 
(ii) 
Foreign Service of Pakistan 
(iii) Police Service of Pakistan 
(c) 
Induction will be equal to 10% of annual vacancies in each of these groups 
with a minimum of 2 vacancies in each group. 
(d) 
Induction/allocation to various Occupational Groups will be through 
FPSC instead of Defence Services Officers Selection Board (DSOSB). 
(e) 
Each Service Headquarter shall have a Board which will examine the 
cases of officers willing to be considered for induction in civil and who 
fulfill the conditions indicated above. 
(f) 
Each Board shall recommend to the Ministry of Defence names equal to 
double the number of available vacancies. 
(g) 
The FPSC will select officers and allocate them to occupational groups* on 
the basis of psychological test, viva voce and regional/provincial quota. 
(h) 
[Re-employment of the retired officers of the armed forces in civil 
besides Office Management Group, Secretariat Group, Foreign Service of 
Pakistan and Information Group has also be extended upto 10% of the 
annual vacancies in Ministries of Health, Education, Communications and 
Intelligence Bureau. There will be no re-employment in @Accounts Group 
in future]. 
 
2. 
Policy governing induction/re-employment of the officers of armed forces 
in civil stands amended to the extent discussed above. 
 
3. 
The Prime Minister has desired that the nominations already forwarded by 
the Ministry of Defence for induction in the civil may be treated as the nominations for 
the year 1991 and forwarded to FPSC for consideration. The needful has been done. 
                                                          
 Previous District Management Group.  
 With ref. to para 1 (b) above, it should read ‗Group and Services‘ insofar as it relates to induction. 
 Subs. vide Estt. Division O.M.No.8/5/96-CP.6/7, dated 30-8-1997. 
@ Pakistan Audit & Accounts Service. 

CHAPTER-3                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              Page -307 
 
 
 
4. 
The Majors nominated by Ministry of Defence vide Annex-C to 
O.M.No.2/25/D-24(C.IV)/91, dated 6th July, 1991 will also be considered for induction 
provided they are below 32 years of age, their overall record in the armed forces is not 
below ―High Average‖ and they are willing to be inducted in posts in BPS 17. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.10(1)/91-CP.I, dated 9-9-1991]. 
9.27 
Induction of Armed Forces Officers in Pakistan Administrative 
Service, Police Service of Pakistan and Foreign Service of Pakistan 
BS-17 
Refer to Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 10(1)/91-CP.I dated 09-09-1991 and 
to state that the competent authority i.e. Prime Minister of Pakistan has been pleased to 
approve that in future the ratio of 4:1:1 (Pakistan Army, Pakistan Air Force, Pakistan Navy) 
be implemented while strictly observing the regional/provincial quota on the subject.  
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s 7/3/2006-CP-4/CP-5, dated 27-08-2020]. 
9.28 
Re-employment of Retired Armed Forces Officers in Civil in 
Specified Service Groups/Ministries through Defence Services 
Officers Selection Board (DSOSB) 
 
Attention is invited to the Establishment Division's O.M.No.14/5/78-D-III, dated 
10th February, 1980 on the subject amended from time to time. The   Prime Minister has 
been pleased to approve that the employment of the retired armed forces officers will be 
on cyclic basis upto a maximum period of 05(five) years in each case (commencing from 
the date of the re-employment of the first officer against that vacancy) or till the date of 
attaining the age of 60 years, whichever is earlier. 
 
2. 
Policy governing induction/re-employment of the officers of armed forces 
in civil stands amended to the extent as mentioned in para 1 above. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.4/1/96-CP.7, dated 14-2-1998]. 
 
9.29 
Constitutions and Functions of the  
Departmental Promotion Committees 
 
The Cabinet has decided that Departmental Promotion Committees should be set 
up in all Ministries to make recommendations in respect of posts which must be filled by 
selection and which do not come within the scope of the Selection Board. 
 
2.  
The scope of Departmental Promotion Committees shall include promot-
ions within Class I or from Class II* to Class I and within Class II. It is not, however, 
intended that in respect of services which have a senior and a junior time-scale, the 
                                                          
 Class - Gazetted Posts       
 
 
Corresponding Grades 
 
 
 
 
 
Gazetted Posts 
(1) Class I .............(1)----------------------------------------- BPS 17 to 22 
 
(2) Class II ............(2) ----------------------------------------- BPS 16 
Non-Gazetted Posts 
 
(3) Class II ............(3) ----------------------------------------- BPS 11 to 15 
 
(4) Class III............(4) ----------------------------------------- BPS  3 to 10 
 
(5) Class IV.............(5) ----------------------------------------- BPS 1 and 2 
  
 

Page -308                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-3 
 
 
ordinary movement of an officer from the junior to the senior time-scale should come 
before the Committee‘s purview. Recommendations of Departmental Committees 
concerning promotions from Class II to Class I shall, also be subject to the approval of 
the Federal Public Service Commission. 
 
3. 
The Committee to be established in each Ministry should consist of the 
Secretary or an officer nominated by him and at least two other officers who preferably 
should be officers familiar with the work of candidates for promotion. 
 
4. 
It will be open to each Ministry to have more than one Committee for 
dealing with promotions to different categories of posts, e.g., one Committee for 
promotion to posts of Superintendents and another for promotion to other posts. Where 
separate Committees are set up, it will be desirable to maintain liaison between them by 
having, for example, a common member. 
 
5. 
The Public Service Commission should be associated with these 
Committees to the greatest extent possible. The Commission should invariably be invited 
to depute a member to sit on all Committees dealing with promotions to and within any 
Central Service, Class I. It may not be practicable for the Commission, at any rate at 
present, to be represented on all Committees in connection with promotions to and within 
the Central Service, Class II, but the list of such services under the control of each 
Ministry should be examined in order to determine whether or not there are any services 
in making promotions to which it is particularly desirable to have the Commission 
represented in the relevant Committee. 
 
6. 
The promotions recommended will, to the extent desired by the Minister, 
be subject to the approval of the Minister in charge. 
 
7. 
The association of the Commission to the extent contemplated, with these 
departmental promotion Committees is not intended to remove the necessity for a formal 
reference of a proposal to the Commission in cases where the consultation with the 
Commission is necessary under statutory rules. 
 
8. 
The Committees should follow the method of maintaining a list of persons 
fit for promotion and no departure from the order in that list should be made without the 
authority of the Committee provided that when the public interest demands an officer not 
in the list and not next in the order of the list may be appointed for a period not exceeding 
four months. The list should be revised and brought up-to-date annually. 
 
9. 
As regards Class III services, Ministries and Heads of Departments should 
consider organizing Committees on such similar or other lines as might appear suitable to 
them. It is left open to them to make their own arrangements in regard to Class III 
appointment. 
 
10. 
Ministries are requested to proceed with the formation of Departmental 
Promotion Committees and to supply the Establishment with copies of relevant orders not 
later than the end of February, 1948. 
[Authority:– Establishment Division‘s Office Memorandum No. 33/1/47-Ests-SE II, dated the 29th 
January, 1948]. 
 
______________________________ 

CHAPTER 4  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPOINTMENTS 
 (309-310) 

CHAPTER-4                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page - 311 
 
CHAPTER 4 
APPOINTMENTS  
  Sl. 
No(s). 
Chapter Contents 
Page   
No(s). 
 
1.1 
Civil Servants Act, 1973 (Act No. LXXI of 1973) ......................... 317-327 
 
1.2  Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973327-336 
 
1.3 
Amendment in the Recruitment Rules of Civil Posts ...................... 
336 
 
1.4 
Civil Servants (Confirmation) Rules, 1993 .........................................  336-339 
 
I. GENERAL CONDITION FOR APPOINTMENTS 
 
 
2.1 
Conditions for Appointment, Promotion and Transfer Rules for 
Assistant Incharge, Stenotypist, Assistant, UDC and LDC ............ 
340-342 
 
2.2 
Conditions for Appointment, Promotion and Transfer Rules for 
Private Secretary, Superintendent and Assistant Private 
Secretary......................................................................................... 
342-344 
 
2.3 
Method and Conditions of Appointment to Posts in BPS 4 and 
Below ............................................................................................. 
345-348 
 
2.4 
Physical Fitness .............................................................................. 
348 
 
2.5 
Verification of Antecedents on First Appointment ............................  348-356 
 
2.6 
Recognition 
of 
Defence/Staff 
Colleges 
Qualifications 
as 
Equivalent to University Degree for Government Employment ........  
357 
 
II. 
RELAXATION OF UPPER AGE LIMIT 
 
 
3.1 
Initial Appointment to Civil Posts (Relaxation of Upper Age 
Limit) Rules, 1993 .......................................................................... 
358-359 
 
3.2 
Clarification Regarding General Relaxation of 5 Years in Upper 
Age Limit Prescribed in Recruitment Rules ................................... 
359-361 
 
3.3 
Relaxation in Upper Age Limit to Persons Employed in Governme361-362 
 
III. 
CONTRACT APPOINTMENTS 
 
 
4.1 
Appointment on Contract Basis ..........................................................  363-365 
 
4.2 
Guidelines for Appointment on Contract Basis .............................. 365-367 
 
4.3 
Policy Guidelines for Contract Appointments for Posts in 
Autonomous/Semi-Autonomous Bodies, Corporations, Public 
Sector Companies etc. Owned and Managed by the Federal 
Government .................................................................................... 
367-368 
 
4.4 
Protection 
of 
Pay 
of 
Contract 
Employees 
on 
Regularization/Appointment on Regular Basis .............................. 
368-369 
 
4.5 
Extension in the Period of Contract Appointments for Posts 
Outside the Purview of FPSC ......................................................... 
369-370 
 
4.6 
Standard Terms and Conditions of Contract Appointments – 
Case of Retired Civil Servants, Retired Officers of the Armed 
Forces, Retired Judges of Superior Courts ..................................... 
370-371 
 

Page -312                              ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                         CHAPTER-4 
 
 
  Sl. 
No(s). 
Chapter Contents 
Page   
No(s). 
 
4.7 Standard Terms and Conditions of Contract Appointments – 
Case of Retired Civil Servants, Retired Officers of the Armed 
Forces, Retired Judges of Superior Courts ..................................... 
371 
 
4.8 Standard Terms and Conditions of Contract Appointment-Case 
of Retired Civil Servants, Retired Officers of the Armed Forces, 
Retired Judges of Superior Courts .................................................. 
371-372 
 
4.9 Clarification on Protection of Pay of Gazetted Contract Employees 
on Regularization/Appointment on Regular Basis .............................  
372 
 
IV. CURRENT/ADDITIONAL CHARGE AND ACTING 
CHARGE APPOINTMENTS 
 
 
5.1 
Current/Additional Charge and Acting Charge Appointments ...........  373-374 
 
5.2 
Clarification Regarding Length of Service for Current Charge ............  
374 
 
5.3 
Enhancement of Special Pay Admissible to an Officer Appointed to 
Hold Current Charge of a Higher Post ...................................................  
374 
 
5.4 
Current Charge Appointment – Determination of Seniority Within 
an Organization ...................................................................................  
375 
 
5.5 
Extension in Current Charge Appointment .........................................  375-376 
 
5.6 
Grant of Current Charge of the Post of Section Officer to 
Superintendents/Assistants in Ministries/Divisions............................  
376 
 
5.7 
Correct Designation of Officers Holding Current Charge of Higher 
Posts ....................................................................................................  
376 
 
5.8 
Appointment of Officers on Current Charge Against Higher 
Posts and Payment of Additional Remuneration Therefor ............. 
376-377 
 
5.9 
Guidelines for Appointment of  Officers on Current Charge 
Against Higher Posts and Payment of Additional Remuneration 
Therefor .......................................................................................... 
377-378 
 
5.10 Combination of Appointments ....................................................... 
378 
 
5.11 Combination of Appointments – Authorization to Secretaries ....... 
379 
 
5.12 Additional Charge Appointment: Procedure and Remuneration ........  379-380 
 
5.13 Combination of Charge/Additional Charge Appointment Not to 
Be Notified ..........................................................................................  
380 

CHAPTER-4                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page - 313 
 
  Sl. 
No(s). 
Chapter Contents 
Page   
No(s). 
 
5.14 Appointment on Acting Charge Basis ................................................  
381 
 
5.15 Acting Charge Appointment – Counting of Service ..........................  381-382 
 
5.16 Clarification About the Look after Charge .........................................  
382 
 
V. ADHOC APPOINTMENTS 
 
 
6.1 
Advertisement for Ad-Hoc Appointments ...................................... 
383 
 
6.2 
Ad-Hoc Appointees to Be Clearly Told of the Conditions of 
Their Appointments........................................................................ 
383 
 
6.3 
Proposals for Continuance of Ad-Hoc Appointments .................... 383-384 
 
6.4 
Ad-Hoc Appointments and Approval for Extension ...................... 
384 
 
6.5 
Submission of Summaries Regarding Ad-Hoc Appointments........ 384-385 
 
6.6 
Seniority of Ad-Hoc Appointees for Purposes of Reversion or 
Termination of Services on Availability of Regular Appointees 
385 
 
VI. RE-APPOINTMENTS 
 
 
7.1 
Re-appointment to Grade 17 or Above Posts ................................. 
386 
 
7.2 
Re-appointment to Posts and Selection Board....................................  
386 
 
7.3 
Appointment of Secretaries to Government .......................................  386-387 
 
7.4 
Notifications Regarding Postings, Transfers etc. of Officers of the 
Status of Joint Secretary and Above ...................................................  
387-388 
 
VII. MANNER OF SUBMISSION OF CASES 
 
 
8.1 
Manner of Submission of Cases to the Establishment Minister .........  389-390 
 
8.2 
Check List of Information/ Material in Cases to be Submitted to 
the Establishment Minister .................................................................  
390-395 
 
VIII. MODE OF NOTIFICATION FOR APPOINTMENTS, 
PROMOTION ETC. 
 
 
9.1 
Mode of Notifying  Appointments, Promotions etc., after 
Introduction of  the Scheme of Basic Pay Scales ...............................  
396-398 
 
9.2 
Continuance of the Practice of Notifying All Appointments in BPS 
16 or Above in the Gazette .................................................................  
399 
 
9.3 
Approval of Competent Authority and Assumption of Charge ..........  
399 
 
IX. 
SHORT TERM APPOINTMENTS 
 
 
10.1 Other Short-Term Appointments ........................................................  
400 
 
10.2 Vacancies Caused by Deputation of Officers Abroad ...........................  400-401 
 
10.3 Vacancies Caused by Suspension of Government Servants ...............  
401 
 
10.4 Procedure for Creation of Posts of Officer on Special Duty 
(O.S.D.) and Making Appointments Thereto .....................................  
401-403 
 
X. 
APPOINTMENT OF CONSULTANTS 
 
 
11.1 Re-employment of Consultant After the Age of Superannuation ... 
404 

Page -314                              ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                         CHAPTER-4 
 
 
  Sl. 
No(s). 
Chapter Contents 
Page   
No(s). 
 
11.2 Submission of Panels for Nomination by the Prime Minister ........ 
405 
 
11.3 Guidelines for Appointment of Consultants ................................... 405-408 
 
11.4 Guidelines for Appointment of Consultants – Designing of a 
Proforma ...................................................................................................  
408-410 
 
XI. 
UPGRADTION POLICY 
 
 
12.1  Upgradation of Posts and Procedure for Filling-up of Upgraded 
Posts ....................................................................................................  
411 
12.2 Upgradation of Posts ...................................................................... 411-412 
12.3 Policy for Upgradation/Re-designation of Posts ............................ 412-413 
12.4 Upgradation of Ministerial Posts .................................................... 413-414 
12.5 Upgradation of Ministerial Posts .................................................... 
415 
12.6 Appointment to Upgraded Posts ..................................................... 
415 
12.7 Upgradation of the Posts of Stenotypist, Stenographer and 
Private Secretary ............................................................................ 
415-416 
12.8 Re-designation of the post of *Stenographer (BS-16) as Assistant 
Private Secretary (BS-16) ...................................................................  
416 
12.9 Upgradation/Re-designation of the Post .............................................  
417 
 
XII. PRIME MINISTER’S ASSISTANCE PACKAGE 
 
 
13.1 Assistance Package for Families of Government Employees 
Who Die in Service ........................................................................ 
418-419 
 
13.2 Assistance Package for Families of Government Employees 
Who Die in Service ........................................................................ 
419-424 
 
13.3 Assistance Package for Families of Government Employees 
Who Die in Service ........................................................................ 
425 
 
13.4 Assistance Package for Families of Government Employees 
Who Die in Service ........................................................................ 
425 
 
13.5 Assistance Package for Families of Government Employees 
Who Die in Service ........................................................................ 
425-426 
 
13.6 Revision of Assistance Package for Families of Government 
Employees Who Die in Service ...................................................... 
426-430 
 
13.7 Revision of Assistance Package for Families of Government 
Employees Who Die in Service ...................................................... 
430-431 
 
13.8 Revision of Assistance Package for Families of Government 
Employees Who Die in Service ...................................................... 
431 
 
13.9 Revision of Assistance Package for Families of Government 
Employees Who Die in Service ...................................................... 
431-432 
 
13.10 Revision of Assistance Package for Families of Government 
Employees Who Die in Service ...................................................... 
432 
 
13.11 Revision of Assistance Package for Families of Government 
Employees Who Die in Service ...................................................... 
432 
 
13.12 Revision of Assistance Package for Families of Government 
Employees Who Die in Service ...................................................... 
432-433 
 
13.13 Revision of Assistance Package for Families of Government 
Employees Who Die in Service (For Shuhda of ICT Police) ......... 
433-437 
                                                          
 Now Assistant Private Secretary. 

CHAPTER-4                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page - 315 
 
  Sl. 
No(s). 
Chapter Contents 
Page   
No(s). 
 
13.14 Appointment on Employees Son Quota Under Prime Minister’s 
Assistance Package ........................................................................ 
13.15 Revision of Assistance Package for Families of Government 
Employees Who Die in Service (For Shuhda of ANF Personnel) .. 
437-438 
 
438-441 
 
XIII. 
MANAGEMENT POSITION SCALES POLICY,2020 
 
 
14.1 Management Position Scales Policy,2020 ...................................... 442-452 
 
14.2 General Criteria for Need Assessment, Recruitment and Performance
 
Divisions .............................................................................................  
452-455 
 
14.3 Clarification 
Regarding 
General 
Criteria 
for 
Need  
Assessment, 
Recruitment 
and 
Performance 
Evaluation 
 ............. for Hiring Contractual Appointment in Special Professional 
455-456 
 
XIV. ACCOMMODATION FACILITIES TO GOVERNMENT 
 
SERVANT 
 
 
15.1 Provision of Government Accommodation to all Government Servan
457 
 
15.2 Provision of Accommodation to Persons Employed on Contract by 
Organizations from Own Available Accommodation ........................  
457 
 
15.3 Provision of Government-Owned or Hired Residence to Persons 
Appointed on Contract ................................................................... 
457-458 
 
XV. GOVERNMENT POLICY IN REGARD TO 
AUTONOMOUS BODIES 
 
 
16.1 Government Policy in Regard to Autonomous Bodies Established 
459 
 
16.2 Procedure Regarding Appointment in Autonomous/Semi-
Autonomous Bodies, Under the Federal Government .................... 
459-462 
 
16.3 Unauthorized Assignment of the Charge of the Posts 
of 
Secretary/Additional 
Secretary/Head 
of 
Departments/ 
Organizations ......................................................................................  
462 
 
16.4 Cases to be Submitted to the Prime Minister for his Orders ..............  
462 
_________________ 

 CHAPTER-4                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page - 317 
 
 
CHAPTER 4 
APPOINTMENTS  
 
In pursuance of provisions in the Constitution as in Chapter-1, the Government of 
Pakistan has promulgated the Civil Servants Act,1973. This Act applies to all Government 
Servants who are holders of civil posts in connection with the affairs of the Federation 
excluding those who are:— 
i. 
On deputation from the Provinces; 
ii. 
Persons employed on contract or on work-charged basis or who are paid 
from contingencies; and 
iii. 
―Workers‖ or ‗Workmen‘ as defined under the Factories Act,1934 or the 
Workmen‘s Compensation Act,1923. 
1.1 
Civil Servants Act, 1973  
(Act No. LXXI of 1973) 
 
An Act to regulate the appointment of persons to, and the terms and conditions 
of service of persons in, the service of Pakistan. 
 
WHEREAS it is expedient to regulate by law, the appointment of persons to, and 
the terms and conditions of service of persons in, the service of Pakistan, and to provide for 
matters connected therewith or ancillary thereto; 
 
It is hereby enacted as follows:— 
 
1.  Short title, application and commencement.– (1) This Act may be called the 
Civil Servants Act, 1973.  
 
(2)  It applies to all civil servants wherever they may be. 
 
(3)  It shall come into force at once. 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
 
2. 
Definitions.–(1) In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the 
subject or context,– 
(a) 
―ad hoc appointment‖ means appointment of a duly qualified person made 
otherwise than in accordance with the prescribed method of recruitment, 
pending recruitment in accordance with such method; 
(b) 
―civil servant‖ means a person who is a member of an All Pakistan 
Service or of a civil service of the Federation, or who holds a civil post in 
connection with the affairs of the Federation, including any such post connected 
with defence, but does not include– 
                                                          
The Act received assent of the President on the 26th September, 1973 and was published in the Gazette of 
 Pakistan, Extra Part I, September, 29, 1973. 
 

Page -318                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-4 
 
 
(i) 
a person who is on deputation to the Federation from any Province 
or other authority; 
(ii) 
a person who is employed on contract, or on work-charged basis or 
who is paid from contingencies; or 
(iii)  a person who is a ―worker‖ or ―workman‖ as defined in the 
Factories Act, 1934 (XXV of 1934), or the Workman's 
Compensation Act, 1923 (VIII of 1923); 
(c) 
―initial appointment‖ means appointment made otherwise than by 
promotion or transfer; 
(d) 
―pay‖ means the amount drawn monthly by a civil servant as pay and 
includes technical pay, special pay, personal pay and other emoluments 
declared by the prescribed authority to be pay; 
(e) 
―permanent post‖ means a post sanctioned without limit of time; 
(f) 
―prescribed‖ means prescribed by rules; 
(g) 
―rules‖ 'means rules made or deemed to have been made under this Act; 
(h) 
―selection authority‖ means the Federal Public Service Commission, a 
departmental selection board, departmental selection committee or other 
authority or body on the recommendation of, or in consultation with which 
any appointment or promotion, as may be prescribed, is made; and 
(i)  
―temporary post‖ means a post other than a permanent post. 
 
(2) 
For the purposes of this Act, an appointment, whether by promotion or 
otherwise, shall be deemed to have been made on regular basis if it is made in the prescribed 
manner. 
CHAPTER II  
TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE OF CIVIL SERVANTS 
 
3. 
Terms and conditions.– *[(1)] The terms and conditions of a civil servant 
shall be as provided in this Act and the rules. 
 
[(2)  The terms and conditions of service of any person to whom this Act 
applies shall not be varied to his disadvantage]. 
 
 [(3)The Federal Government may transfer a civil servant of a devolved 
Ministry or Division, in an Attached Department or Subordinate Office situated in a 
                                                          
 Re-numbered and added vide Civil Servants (Amendment) Act V of 1996, s.2, dated 17-3-1996. 
Added by Civil Servant (Amendment) Act,2016 (IX of 2016)s.2 dated 21-03-2016. 

 CHAPTER-4                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page - 319 
 
 
Province, to the Province concerned, in consequence of the devolution of functions 
pursuant to the Constitution (Eighteenth Amendment) Act,2010 (X of 2010) and thereby 
he shall become the civil servant of the respective Province, on the same terms and 
conditions of service as were applicable to him before such transfer.  
 
(4) 
The Federal Government may transfer a civil servant working in a 
Ministry, Division, Attached Department or Subordinate Office located in the Islamabad 
Capital Territory to any other Ministry, Division, Attached Department or Subordinated 
Office, in consequence of the abolition of such Ministry, Division, Attached Department 
or Subordinate Office pursuant to the Constitution (Eighteenth Amendment) Act,2010 (X 
of 2010) and thereby he shall become the civil servant of the respective Ministry, 
Division, Department or Office to which he is so transferred, on the same terms and 
conditions of service as were applicable to him before such transfer.  
 
(5) 
The seniority of the civil servants transferred by virtue of sub-sections (3) 
and (4) shall be determined by the concerned Province, Ministry or Division, as the case 
may be, in accordance with the rules.  
 
(6) 
The cases of civil servants of a Ministry, Division, Attached Department 
or Subordinate Office devolved in pursuant to the Constitution (Eighteenth Amendment) 
Act,2010 (X of 2010) and working in FATA, Gilgit Baltistan and AJK shall be dealt with 
in the manner as may be provided by an Order made by the President in this behalf.]  
 
4. 
Tenure of office of civil servants.– Every civil servant shall hold office 
during the pleasure of the President. 
 
5. 
Appointments.– Appointments to an All-Pakistan Service or to a civil 
service of the Federation or to a civil post in connection with the affairs of the Federation, 
including any civil post connected with defence, shall be made in the prescribed manner 
by the President or by a person authorised by the President in that behalf. 
 
6. 
Probation.– (1) An initial appointment to a service or post referred to in 
section 5, not being an ad hoc appointment, shall be on probation as may be prescribed. 
 
(2)  Any appointment of a civil servant by promotion or transfer to a service or 
post may also be made on probation as may be prescribed. 
 
Where, in respect of any service or post, the satisfactory completion of probation 
includes the passing of a prescribed examination, test or course or successful completion 
of any training, a person appointed on probation to such service or post who, before the 
expiry of the original or extended period of his probation, has failed to pass such 
examination or test or to successfully complete course or the training shall, except as may 
be prescribed otherwise,- 
(a) 
if he was appointed to such service or post by initial recruitment, be, 
discharged; or 
(b) 
if he was appointed to such service or post by promotion or transfer, be 
reverted to the service or post from which he was promoted or transferred 
and against which he holds a lien or, if there be no such service or post, be 
discharged: 

Page -320                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-4 
 
 
 
Provided that, in the case of initial appointment to a service or post, 
a civil servant shall not be deemed to have completed his period of probation 
satisfactorily until his character and antecedents have been verified as 
satisfactory in the opinion of the appointing authority. 
 
7. 
Confirmation.–(1) A person appointed on probation shall, on  satisfactory 
completion of his probation, be eligible for confirmation in a service or, as the case may 
be, a post as may be prescribed.  
 
(2) 
A civil servant promoted to a post [ ** ] on regular basis shall be eligible 
for confirmation after rendering satisfactory service for the period prescribed for confirmation 
therein. 
 
(3) 
There shall be no confirmation against any temporary post. 
 
(4)   A civil servant who, during the period of his service, was eligible to be 
confirmed in any service or against any post retires from service before being confirmed shall 
not, merely by reason of such retirement, be refused confirmation in such service or post or 
any benefits accruing therefrom. 
 
(5) 
Confirmation of a civil servant in a service or post shall take effect from 
the date of occurrence of permanent vacancy in that service or post or from the date of 
continuous officiation, in such service or post, whichever is later. 
 
8.  
Seniority.–(1) For proper administration of a service, cadre or *[post] the 
appointing authority shall cause a seniority list of the members for the time being of such 
service, cadre or *[post] to be prepared, but nothing herein contained shall be construed to 
confer any vested right to a particular seniority in such service, cadre or *[post], as the case 
may be. 
 
(2) 
Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), the seniority of a civil servant 
shall be reckoned in relation to other civil servants belonging to the same *[service or 
cadre] whether serving in the same department or office or not, as may be prescribed. 
 
(3) 
Seniority on initial appointment to a service, cadre or post shall be 
determined as may be prescribed. 
 
(4)  Seniority in *[a post, service or cadre] to which a civil servant is promoted 
shall take effect from the date of regular appointment to that post: 
 
 
Provided that civil servants who are selected for promotion to a higher 
*[post] in one batch shall, on their promotion to the higher *[post], retain their 
inter se seniority as in the lower *[post]. 
 
9. 
Promotion.–(1) A civil servant possessing such minimum qualifications 
as may be prescribed shall be eligible for promotion to a *[higher] post for the time being 
reserved under the rules for departmental promotion in [   ] the service or cadre to which 
he belongs [:] 
                                                          
The words "or  Grade" omitted & subs. vide Civil Servants(Amdt.) Ordinance No.III of 1984 (w.e.f.1-7-1983). 
 Omitted vide Civil Servants (Amendment) Ordinance No. III of 1984, s.4, (w.e.1. 1-7-1983). 
 Subs. vide Civil Servants (Amendment) Ordinance No. XXXIIl of 2001, dated 4-8-2001. 

 CHAPTER-4                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page - 321 
 
 
 
 [―Provided that the posts of– 
 (a)  Additional Secretary and Senior Joint Secretary may, in the public interest, 
be filled by promotion from amongst officers of regularly constituted 
Occupational Groups and services holding, on regular basis, posts in Basic 
Pay Scale 20; and 
(b)  Secretary may, in the public interest, be filled by, promotion from amongst 
officers of regularly constituted Occupational Groups and services holding, on 
regular basis, posts in Basic Pay Scale 21; 
 
In such manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed.] 
 
(2)  A post referred to in sub-section (1) may either be a selection post or a non 
selection post to which promotions shall be made as may be prescribed– 
(a) 
in the case of a selection post, on the basis of selection on merit; and 
(b) 
in the case of a non-selection post, on the basis of seniority-cum-fitness. 
 
[(3) Promotion to posts in basic pay scales 20 and 21 and equivalent shall be made 
on the recommendations of a Selection Board which shall be headed by the Chairman, Federal 
Public Service Commission]. 
 
10.  Posting and transfer.- Every civil servant shall be liable to serve any 
where within or outside Pakistan, in any [equivalent or higher] post under the Federal 
Government, or any Provincial Government or local authority, or a corporation or body set up 
or established by any such Government: 
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to a civil 
servant recruited specifically to serve in a particular area or region: 
 
Provided further that, where a civil servant is required to serve in a 
post outside his service or cadre, his terms and conditions of service as to 
his pay shall not be less favourable than those to which he would have 
been entitled if he had not been so required to serve. 
 
@[10A. Restriction on service in international organization.- (1) No civil 
servant shall, during his service, serve in any international organization, including an 
international non-governmental organization, international financial institution and 
foreign donor agency.  
 
(2) 
The restriction under sub-section (1) shall not apply to a civil servant who 
is posted or deputed in such an organization on behalf of Pakistan or with prior 
permission of the Federal Government in accordance with rules, which shall be laid 
before both Houses of Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament).] 
                                                          
 Added vide Civil Servants (Amendment) Ordinance No. XXXIIl of 2001, dated 4-8-2001. 
 Added vide Civil Servants (Amendment) Ordinance No. XLIII of 2000, dated 6-7-2000. 
 Ins. vide Civil Servants (Amendment) Act V of 1996, s.3, dated 17-3-1996. 
@ Ins. by Civil Servant (Amendment) Act,2016 (XVII of 2016) s.2. 

Page -322                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-4 
 
 
 
11. 
Termination of Service.– (1) The service of a civil servant may be terminated 
without notice– 
(i)  
during the initial or extended period of his probation: 
 
 
Provided that, where such civil servant is appointed by promotion on 
probation or, as the case may be, is transferred from one [service], cadre 
or post to another *[service] cadre or post, his service shall not be so 
terminated so long as he holds a lien against his former post in such 
*[service] cadre or post but he shall be reverted to his former *[service], 
cadre or post as the case may be; 
(ii)  on the expiry of the initial or extended period of his employment; or  
(iii)  if the appointment is made ad hoc terminable on the appointment of a 
person on the recommendation of the selection authority, on the 
appointment of such person. 
 
(2) 
Where, on the abolition of a post or reduction in the number of posts in a 
cadre or * [service] the services of a civil servant are required to be terminated, the person 
whose services are terminated shall ordinarily be the one who is the most junior in such 
cadre or * [service]. 
 
(3)  Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-section (1), but subject to the 
provisions of sub-section (2), the service of a civil servant in temporary employment or 
appointed ad hoc shall be liable to termination on fourteen days' notice or pay in lieu thereof. 
 
[11-A. Absorption of civil servants rendered surplus.–Notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Act, the rules, agreement, contract or the terms and conditions of 
service, a civil servant who is rendered surplus as a result of re-organization or abolition of a 
Division, department, office or abolition of a post in pursuance of any Government decision 
may be appointed to a post, carrying basic pay scale equal to the post held by him before such 
appointment, if he possesses the qualifications and fulfils other conditions applicable to that 
post: 
 
Provided that where no equivalent post is available he may be offered a 
lower post in such manner, and subject to such conditions, as may be prescribed 
and where such civil servant is appointed to a lower post the pay being drawn by 
him in the higher post immediately preceding his appointment to a lower post 
shall remain protected]. 
 
[11-B. (1) Where it is brought to the notice of the appointing authority that 
appointment of a person to a civil post was made without observing the prescribed 
procedure or without fulfilling the prescribed qualification, experience and age limit, it 
may send a reference to the Federal Public Service Commission for determination 
whether he is fit to hold the post to which he was appointed and, if not, whether he is fit 
to hold any other post compatible with his qualification and experience. 
                                                          
 Subs. vide Civil Servants (Amendment) Ordinance No. III of 1984 (w.e.f. 1-7-1983). 
 Inserted vide Civil Servants (Amendment) Ordinance No. XX of 2001. 
 Added vide Civil Servants (Amendment) Ordinance No. CXXX of 2002 promulgated on 13.11.2002. 

 CHAPTER-4                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page - 323 
 
 
 
(2) 
On receipt of the advice of the Federal Public Service Commission on a 
reference made under sub-section (1), the appointing authority may pass such order of 
appointment or termination of service as may be considered by it to be just and equitable: 
 
 Provided that if it is proposed to pass order of termination of service in 
the light of the advice of the Commission, a reasonable opportunity of showing 
cause against the order of termination, shall be provided. 
  
(3)  Where an order of appointment is made on the advice of the Commission, it 
shall be treated as a case of fresh appointment and seniority of such an appointee shall be 
determined in accordance with the Civil Servants (Seniority) Rules, 1993].  
 
12. 
[Reversion to a lower post etc.– (1) A civil servant appointed to a higher 
post on ad hoc, temporary or officiating basis shall be liable to reversion to his lower post. 
 
(2) 
No civil servant shall be dismissed or removed from service or reduced in 
rank by an authority subordinate to that by which he was appointed. 
 
 (3)  No such civil servant as aforesaid shall be dismissed or removed from 
service, or reduced in rank, until he has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing 
cause against the action proposed to be taken against him: 
 
Provided that this sub-section shall not apply:– 
(i)  
Where a civil servant is dismissed or removed from service or reduced in 
rank on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a 
criminal charge; or 
(ii)  Where the President or any person authorised by him under the rules is 
satisfied, for reasons to be recorded in writing, that in the interest of the 
security of Pakistan or any part thereof, it is not expedient to give to that 
civil servant such an opportunity]. 
 
12-A. [* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*] 
 
 
13. [Retirement from service.–(1) A civil servant shall retire from service– 
(i)  
on such date after he has completed @[twenty] years of service qualifying for 
pension or other retirement benefits as the competent authority may, in public 
interest, direct; or 
(ii)  where no direction is given under clause (i), on the completion of the 
sixtieth year of his age. 
                                                          
 Subs. vide Civil Servants (Amendment) Act V of 1996, s.4, dated 17-3-1996. 
 Omitted by Act IX of 2016 s.4 21-03-2016. 
 Subs. vide Civil Servants (Amendment) Ordinance No. XX of 2000, dated 1-6-2000. 
@ Subs. vide Civil Servants (Amendment) Ordinance No. XXXIV of 2001, promulgated on 4-8-2001. 

Page -324                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-4 
 
 
 
(2)  No direction under clause (i) of sub-section (1) shall be made until the 
civil servant has been informed in writing of the grounds on which it is proposed to make 
the direction, and has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the 
said direction. 
 
Explanation: In this Section, ―competent authority‖ means the appointing 
authority prescribed in rule 6 of the Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and 
Transfer) Rules, 1973]. 
 
14.   Employment after retirement.–(1) A retired civil servant shall not be re-
employed under the Federal Government, unless such re-employment is necessary in the 
public interest and is made with the prior approval of the authority next above the 
appointing authority: 
 
Provided that, where the appointing authority is the President, such re-
employment may be ordered with the approval of the President. 
 
 (2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 3 of the ex-
Government Servants (Employment with Foreign Governments) (Prohibition) Act, 1966 
(XII of 1966), a civil servant may, during leave preparatory to retirement, or after 
retirement from Government service, seek any private employment: 
 
Provided that, where employment is sought by a civil servant while on 
leave preparatory to retirement or within two years of the date of his retirement, 
he shall obtain the prior approval of the prescribed authority. 
 
15. 
Conduct.– The conduct of a civil servant shall be regulated by rules made, 
or instructions issued, by Government or a prescribed authority, whether generally or in 
respect of a specified group or class of civil servants. 
 
16.  Efficiency and discipline.– A civil servant shall be liable to prescribed 
disciplinary action and penalties in accordance with the prescribed procedure. 
 
17.   Pay.– A civil servant appointed to a post [ * * ] shall be entitled, in 
accordance with the rules, to the pay sanctioned for such post *[ * * ] : 
 
Provided that, when the appointment is made on a current charge basis or 
by way of additional charge, his pay shall be fixed in the prescribed manner: 
 
Provided further that where a civil servant has under an order which is later set 
aside, been dismissed or removed from service or reduced in rank, he shall, on the setting 
aside of such order, be entitled to such arrears of pay as the authority setting aside such 
order may determine. 
 
18.  Leave.– A civil servant shall be allowed leave in accordance with the 
leave rules applicable to him, provided that the grant of leave will depend on the 
exigencies of service and be at the discretion of the competent authority.  
                                                          
 The words "or Grade" Omitted vide Civil Servants (Amendment) Ordinance No.III of 1984, w.e.f. 1-7-1983. 

 CHAPTER-4                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page - 325 
 
 
 
19.  Pension and Gratuity.– (1) On retirement from service, a civil servant 
shall be entitled to receive such pension or gratuity as may be prescribed. 
 
(2)   In the event of the death of a civil servant, whether before or after retirement, 
his family shall be entitled to receive such pension, or gratuity, or both, as may be prescribed. 
 
(3) 
No pension shall be admissible to a civil servant who is dismissed or 
removed from service for reasons of discipline, but Government may sanction 
compassionate allowance to such a civil servant, not exceeding two-thirds of the pension 
or gratuity which would have been admissible to him had he been invalided from service 
on the date of such dismissal or removal. 
 
(4) 
If the determination of the amount of pension or gratuity admissible to a 
civil servant is delayed beyond one month of the date of his retirement or death, he or his 
family, as the case may be, shall be paid provisionally such anticipatory pension or 
gratuity as may be determined by the prescribed authority, according to the length of 
service of the civil servant which qualifies for pension or gratuity; and any over payment 
consequent on such provisional payment shall be adjusted against the amount of pension 
or gratuity finally determined as payable to such civil servant or his family. 
 
20.  Provident Fund.– (1) Before the expiry of the third month of every 
financial year, the accounts officer or other officer required to maintain provident fund 
accounts shall furnish to every civil servant subscribing to a provident fund the account 
of which he is required to maintain a statement under his hand showing the subscriptions 
to, including the interests accruing thereon, if any, and withdrawals or advances from his 
provident fund during the preceding financial year. 
 
(2) 
Where any subscription made by a civil servant to his provident fund has 
not been shown or credited in the account by the accounts or other officer required to 
maintain such account, such subscription shall be credited to the account of the civil 
servant on the basis of such evidence as may be prescribed. 
 
21.  Benevolent Fund and Group Insurance.– AII civil servants and their 
families shall be entitled to the benefits admissible under the Federal Employees 
Benevolent Fund and Group Insurance Act, 1969 (II of 1969), and the rules made 
thereunder. 
 
22. Right of appeal or representation.– (1) Where a right to prefer an appeal 
or apply for review in respect of any order relating to the terms and conditions of his 
service is provided to a civil servant under any rules applicable to him, such appeal or 
application shall, except as may be otherwise prescribed be made within thirty days of the 
date of such order. 
 
(2) 
Where no provision for appeal or review exists under the rules in respect 
of any order or class of orders, a civil servant aggrieved by any such order may, within 
thirty days of the communication to him of such order, make a representation against it, 
to the authority next above the authority which made the order: 

Page -326                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-4 
 
 
 
Provided that no representation shall lie on matters relating to the determination 
of fitness of a person to hold a particular post or to be promoted to a higher post or grade. 
CHAPTER III 
MISCELLANEOUS 
 
23. Saving.– Nothing in this Act or in any rule shall be construed to limit or abridge 
the power of the President to deal with the case of any civil servant in such manner as may 
appear to him to be just and equitable: 
 
Provided that, where this Act or any rule is applicable to the case of a civil 
servant, the case shall not be dealt with in any manner less favourable to him 
than that provided by this Act or such rule. 
 
[23A. Indemnity.– No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie 
against a civil servant for anything done in his official capacity which is in good faith 
done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules, instructions or directions made or 
issued thereunder. 
 
23B. Jurisdiction barred.– Save as provided under this Act and the Service 
Tribunals Act, 1973 (LXX of 1973), or the rules made thereunder, no order made or 
proceedings taken under this Act, or the rules, made thereunder by the President or any 
officer authorized by him shall be called in question  in  any Court and no injunction shall 
be granted  by any Court in respect of any decision made, or proceedings taken in 
pursuance of any power conferred by, or under, this Act or the rules made thereunder]. 
 
24.  Removal of difficulties.– If any difficulty arises in giving effect to any of 
the provisions of this Act, the President may make such order, not inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Act, as may appear to him to be necessary for the purpose of removing 
the difficulty: 
 
Provided that no such power shall be exercised after the expiry of one year 
from the coming into force of this Act. 
CHAPTER IV 
 RULES 
 
25.  Rules.– (1) The President or any person authorised by the President in this 
behalf, may make such rules as appear to him to be necessary or expedient for carrying 
out the purposes of this Act. 
 
(2)  Any rules, orders or instructions in respect of any terms and conditions of 
service of civil servants duly made or issued by an authority competent to make them and 
in force immediately before the commencement of this Act shall, in so far as such rules, 
                                                          
 Added vide Civil Servants (Amendment) Ordinance No. LXI of 2001 dated 7-11-2001. 
 

 CHAPTER-4                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page - 327 
 
 
orders or instructions are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to be 
rules made under this Act. 
 
26.  Repeal.– The Civil Servants Ordinance, 1973 (XIV of 1973), is hereby 
repealed. 
[Authority:— The Act received assent of the President on the 26th September, 1973 and was 
published in the Gazette of Pakistan, Extra Part I, dated 29-9-1973.] 
 
1.2 
Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer)  
 
 
Rules, 1973 
 
In exercise of the powers conferred by section 25 of the Civil Servants Act, 1973 
(LXXI of 1973), the President is pleased to make the following rules, namely:– 
PART I – GENERAL 
 
1. 
These rules may be called the Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and 
Transfer) Rules, 1973. 
 
2. 
In these rules, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,– 
(a) 
―appointing authority‖, in relation to a post means the person authorized 
under rule 6 to make appointment to that post; 
(b) 
* [―selection board‖ means a Board constituted by the **[Prime Minister], 
for the purpose of selection for promotion or transfer to posts in basic pay 
scales 19 to 21 and equivalent, consisting of such persons as may be 
appointed **[**]from time to time]. 
(c) 
―commission‖ means the Federal Public Service Commission; 
(d) 
 [―departmental promotion committee‖ means a Committee constituted for 
the purpose of making selection for promotion or transfer to posts under a 
Ministry, Division, Department or Office of the Federal Government in 
basic pay scales 18 and below and equivalent; and]. 
(e) 
*[―departmental selection committee‖ means a Committee constituted for 
the purpose of making selection for initial appointment to posts under a 
Ministry, Division, Department or Office of the Federal Government in 
basic pay scales 1 and above other than appointments which fall within the 
purview of the Federal Public Service Commission under rule 3 of the 
Federal Public Service Commission (Functions) Rules, 1978; and] 
(f) 
***[Omitted]. 
                                                          
* Subs. vide Estt. Div.‘s Notification S.R.O. No. 430(I)/2000, dated 26-6-2000 
**Subs.& omitted vide Estt. Div.‘s S.R.O No. 855(I)/2019 dated 19-07-2019. 
***Omitted clause (f) vide Estt. Div.‘s Notification SRO No. 146(I)/84, dated 9-2-1984. Related to promotion to 
 
posts in BPS 18 with special pay through CSB. 

Page -328                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-4 
 
 
 
3.   
(1) Appointments to posts shall be made by any of the following methods, 
namely:— 
(a) 
*[by promotion [*  *  *  *] in accordance with Part II of these rules;  
(b) 
by transfer in accordance with Part II of these rules, and 
(c) 
by initial appointment in accordance with Part III of these rules]. 
 
(2) 
The method of appointment and the qualifications and other conditions 
applicable to a post shall be as laid down by the Ministry or Division concerned in 
consultation with the Establishment Division. 
 
**[(3) ―Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule(I), or the method of 
appointment laid down in the recruitment rules, a person who is rendered surplus as a 
result of the reorganization or abolition of a Division, Department, Office or permanent 
post in pursuance of any [decision made through enactment or by the Cabinet or by the 
Prime Minister, or by the authority otherwise competent to do so, as the case may be] or 
as a measure of economy may be appointed to a post in the basic pay scale to which he 
belonged, if he possesses the qualifications, and fulfils other conditions, applicable to that 
post‖]. 
 
@[(4)  Where a person referred to in sub-rule (3),– 
(i) 
possesses educational qualifications which are considered interchangeable 
with, or equivalent to, the qualification prescribed in the relevant recruitment 
rules; or  
(ii) 
fulfils the prescribed qualifications and the conditions for initial 
appointment to the post in the relevant rules except the condition relating 
to prescribed experience, the appointing authority may, for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, relax the requirement of educational qualifications or, 
as the case may be, the prescribed experience]. 
 
4.  
(1) In each Ministry, Division, Department or Office of the Federal 
Government, there shall be one or more Departmental Promotion Committees, and 
Departmental Selection Committees, the composition of which shall be determined by the 
Ministry or Division concerned in consultation with the Establishment Division. 
 
(2) 
Each such Committee shall consist of at least three members one of whom 
shall be appointed Chairman. 
 
5. 
 Where an appointing authority for @@[posts in basic pay scales 15 and below 
and equivalent] does not accept the recommendation of a Departmental Selection or 
Departmental Promotion Committee, it shall record reasons therefor and obtain orders of the 
next higher authority. 
                                                          
* Subs. vide Establishment Division Notification S.R.O. No. 742(I)/2002, dated 28-10-2002. 
** Added vide Establishment Division Notification S.R.O. No. 57(1)/93, dated 25-1-1993. 
 Subs. vide Estt. Div.‘s S.R.O No. 855(I)/2019 dated 19-07-2019. 
@ Added vide Establishment Division Notification S.R.O. No. 961(1)/99, dated 25-8-1999. 
@@ Added vide Establishment Division Notification S.R.O. No.961(I)/99, dated 25-8-1999. 

 CHAPTER-4                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page - 329 
 
 
 
* [6. **[(1)] The appointing authority specified in column (3) of the table below 
shall be competent to make appointment to the various posts in the basic pay scales specified 
in column (2) of that table. 
TABLE 
 
S.No. 
Basic Pay Scale of Posts 
Appointing Authority 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
1. 
Posts in basic pay scales 20 and 
above or equivalent. 
Prime Minister. 
2. 
Posts in basic pay scales 17 to 19 or 
equivalent. 
Secretary of the Ministry or Division 
concerned. 
3. 
Posts in basic pay scale 16 or 
equivalent. 
An officer notified by the Secretary of 
the Ministry or Division concerned. 
4. 
Posts in basic pay scales 3 to 15 or 
equivalent. 
An officer notified by the Secretary of 
the Ministry or Division concerned. 
5. 
Posts in basic pay scales 1 and 2 or 
equivalent. 
An officer notified by the Secretary of 
the Ministry or Division concerned]. 
 
 
@[Provided that appointment to posts in Basic Pay Scales 20 and above or 
equivalent in the President‘s Secretariat shall be made by the President]. 
 
 
@@[(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1), the Appointing 
Authority specified in column (4) of the table below shall be competent to make 
appointments to the posts specified in column (3) of that table in the department specified in 
column (2) thereof. 
 
 
 
                                                          
* Subs. vide Estt. Div.‘s Notification S.R.O.No.276(I)/2000, dated 25-5-2000. 
** Renumbered vide Estt. Div.‘s Notification S.R.O. No.829(I)/2000, dated 16-11-2000. 
 Subs. vide Estt. Div.‘s Notification S.R.O. No.1(I)/2003, dated 1-1-2003 w.e.f. 23.11.2002. 
@ Added vide Estt. Div.‘s Notification S.R.O. No.607(I)/2002, dated 10-9-2002. 
@@ Added vide Estt. Div.‘s Notification S.R.O. No.829(I)/2000, dated 16-11-2000. 

Page -330                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-4 
 
 
TABLE 
 
Sl. # 
Name of Department 
Basic Pay Scale of posts 
Appointing Authority 
1 
2 
3 
4 
1. 
Pakistan 
Audit 
Department and Officers 
of 
Inter-Departmental 
Cadre of Pakistan Audit 
& Accounts Group* 
(i) 
17 to 19 or 
equivalent. 
(ii) 
16 or equivalent. 
 
(iii) 3 to 15 or equivalent. 
(iv) 1 to 2 or equivalent. 
Auditor-General of Pakistan. 
 
An officer notified by the Auditor-
General of Pakistan. 
An officer notified by the Auditor-
General of Pakistan. 
An officer notified by the Auditor-
General of Pakistan]. 
** [2. 
Intelligence Bureau 
(i) 
17-19 or equivalent 
(ii) 
1-16 or equivalent 
Director-General Intelligence Bureau. 
Officer(s) notified by the Director General, 
Intelligence Bureau]. 
***[3. 
Controller General of 
Accounts 
(i) 
BS-17 & 18 and 
equivalent posts in 
the offices specified 
in Section 6 of the 
Controller General 
of Accounts  
(Appointment, 
Functions and 
Powers) Ordinance, 
2001 (XXIV of 
2001). 
(ii) 
BS 1-16 or 
equivalent posts in 
the offices specified 
in Section 6 of the 
Controller General 
of Accounts 
(Appointment, 
Functions and 
Powers) Ordinance, 
2001 (XXIV of 
2001). 
Controller General of Accounts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Officer(s) notified by Controller General 
of Accounts. 
 
 
@[4. 
Directorate General, Inter 
Services Intelligence 
(i) 
BS-17 to BS-19 
(ii) 
BS-1 to BS-16 
Director General, ISI 
Director General (Personnel), ISI  
PART II – APPOINTMENTS BY PROMOTION OR TRANSFER 
 
7. 
 @@[Promotions and transfer to posts in basic pay scales 2 to 18 and 
equivalent shall be made on the recommendation of the appropriate Departmental 
                                                          
* Now Pakistan Audit and Accounts Service vide Estt. Div.‘s OM No. 1/17/92-CP I dated 10-12-2002. 
** Added vide Estt. Div.‘s Notification S.R.O. No.891(I)/2000, dated 14-12-2000. 
*** Substituted vide S.R.O. No. 630(I)/2011, dated 13-6-2011. 
@Added vide S.R.O No. 720 (I)/2021vide Notification No. F.16/38/99-R-II dated 04-06-2021. 
@@ Subs vide Estt. Div.‘s Notification S.R.O. No. 430(I)/2000, dated 26-6-2000. 

 CHAPTER-4                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page - 331 
 
 
Promotion Committee and promotions and transfer to posts in basic pay scales 19 to 21 and 
equivalent shall be made on the recommendation of the Selection Boards]. 
  
*[7-A. (1) The Competent Authority may approve the promotion of an officer or 
official from the date on which the recommendation of the Central Selection Board or, as, 
the case may be, the Departmental Promotion Committee was made. 
 
Notwithstanding anything in FR 17 the officer or official who expires or 
superannuates after the recommendations of the Central Selection Board or the Departmental 
Promotion Committee and before the issuing of the notification, shall stand exempted from 
assumption of the charge of the higher post. The Principal Accounting Officer or an Officer 
so authorized, will give a certificate to the effect that the officer or official has expired or 
superannuated]. 
 
8.  
Only such persons as possess the qualifications and meet the conditions laid 
down for the purpose of promotion or transfer to a post shall be considered by the 
Departmental Promotion Committee or the Central Selection Board, as the case may be. 
 
[8-A. No promotion on regular basis shall be made to posts in basic pay scales [17] 
to 22 and equivalent unless the officer concerned has completed such minimum length of 
service, attended such training and passed such departmental examination, as may be prescribed 
from time to time]. 
 
8-B. (1) Where the appointing authority considers it to be in the public interest to 
fill a post reserved under the rules for departmental promotion and the most senior civil 
servant belonging to the cadre or service concerned who is otherwise eligible for promotion 
does not possess the specified length of service the authority may appoint him to that post on 
acting charge basis. 
 
(2)    @[omitted]  
 
(3) 
In the case of a post in @@[basic pay scales 17 to 22 and equivalent], reserved 
under the rules to be filled by initial appointment, where the appointing authority is satisfied 
that no suitable officer *[drawing pay in basic pay scale] in which the post exists is available 
in that category to fill the post and it is expedient to fill the post, it may appoint to that post 
on acting charge basis the most senior officer otherwise eligible for promotion in the 
organization, cadre or service, as the case may be, in excess of the promotion quota. 
 
(4) 
Acting charge appointment shall be made against posts which are likely to 
fall vacant for a period of six months or more. Against vacancies occurring for less than six 
months, current charge appointment may be made according to the orders issued from time 
to time. 
                                                          
* Added vide Estt. Division‘s Notification No. S.R.O 733(1)/2005, dated 22-7-2005. 
 Subs. vide Estt. Div.‘s Notification S.R.O. No.850(I)/98, dated 25-7-1998. 
 Amended vide Estt. Div.‘s Notification SRO No. 835(I)/2000, dated 17-11-2000. 
@Omitted vide Establishment Division‘s Notification S.R.O No.269(I)/2000, dated 19-5-2000. It provided that as 
long as a civil servant holds the acting charge appointment, a civil servant junior to him shall not be considered for 
regular promotion but may be appointed on acting charge basis on a higher post. 
@@ Subs. vide Establishment Division‘s Notification S.R.O. No. 146(I)/84, dated 9-2-1984. 

Page -332                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-4 
 
 
 
(5) 
Appointment on acting charge basis shall be made on the 
recommendations of the Departmental Promotion Committee or the Central Selection Board, 
as the case may be, save in the case of [post in basic pay scale 22 and equivalent] 
 
(6) 
Acting charge appointment shall not amount to appointment by promotion on 
regular basis for any purpose including seniority. 
 
(7) 
Acting charge appointment shall not confer any vested right for regular 
promotion to the post [ ] held on acting charge basis. 
 
9. 
Appointments by transfer shall be made from amongst the persons holding 
appointment on a regular basis in *[posts in the same basic pay scale or equivalent to or 
identical with the posts to be filled]. 
PART III __ INITIAL APPOINTMENT 
 
10.  **[Initial appointment to the All-Pakistan Services, the Civil Services of the 
Federation and posts in connection with the affairs of the Federation in basic pay scales 16 
& above or equivalent, except those which under the Federal Public Service Commission 
(Functions) Rules, 1978, do not fall within the purview of the Commission, shall be made 
on the basis of tests and examinations to be conducted by the commission] ; and 
 
11. 
**[Initial appointments to posts in basic pay scales 1 to 15 and equivalent, 
shall be made on the recommendations of the Departmental Selection Committee after the 
vacancies have been advertised in newspapers]. 
 
12. 
 A candidate for initial appointment to a post must possess the educational 
qualifications and experience and, except as provided in the rules framed for the purpose of 
relaxation of age limit, must be within the age limit as laid down for the post [ ] ;  
 
***[Provided that unless otherwise specified in the method of appointment, 
qualifications and other conditions applicable to a post as laid down under sub rule (2) of rule 
3, the experience prescribed for initial appointment shall be the post-qualification 
experience]. 
 
@[12-A. Alteration in the date of birth.–The date of birth once recorded at the 
time of joining government service shall be final and thereafter no alteration in the date 
of birth of a civil servant shall be permissible]. 
 
 
13.  A candidate for appointment shall be a citizen of Pakistan; 
Provided that this requirement may be relaxed with the approval of the 
Establishment Division: 
Provided further that, in the case of candidates to be appointed on temporary 
basis to posts in the Pakistan Missions abroad, such relaxation shall not be accorded for a 
period exceeding one year at a time. 
                                                          
 Subs. vide Establishment Division Notification S.R.O. No. 146(I)/84, dated 9-2-1984. 
** Subs. vide Establishment Division Notification S.R.O. No. 773(I)/2013, dated 28-07-2003. 
 Omitted and added vide Estt. Div.'s Notification S.R.O No. 970(I)/98, dated 9-9-1998. 
@ Subs. vide Establishment Division Notification S.R.O. No. 520(I)/2000, dated 31-7-2000. 

 CHAPTER-4                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page - 333 
 
 
 
14. 
Vacancies in the undermentioned posts shall be filled on All-Pakistan 
basis in accordance with the merit and provincial or regional quotas *[as prescribed 
below: 
 
Merit  
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.5% 
 
Punjab (including Federal Area of Islamabad) 
  
50% 
 
Sindh 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19% 
 
 
The share of Sindh will be further  
 
 
Sub-allocated in the following ratio: 
 
 
Urban areas namely Karachi, Hyderabad 
 
40% of 19% 
 
 
and Sukkar  
 
 
 
 
or 7.6% 
 
 
Rural areas i.e. rest of Sindh excluding Karachi  
60% of 19% 
 
 
Hyderabad and Sukkar. 
 
 
 
or 11.4% 
 
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa 
 
 
 
 
11.5% 
 
Balochistan 
 
 
 
 
 
6% 
 
 
Newly merged Districts of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (Ex-FATA)    3% 
(This share shall not be merged into Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and be observed 
independently for next 10 years in conjunction with the ten-year Development 
Plan devised to bring the Ex-FATA at par with the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa 
socially and economically). 
Gilgit-Baltistan  
 
 
 
 
1% 
Azad Kashmir    
 
 
 
 
2%] 
 (i) 
All posts in [basic pay scales 16 and above and equivalent]. 
 (ii) Posts in **[basic pay scales [6 to 15] and equivalent] in offices, which 
serve the whole of Pakistan.  
 
 @[Provided that if no suitable person holding the domicile of the Province or 
Region to which a vacancy has been earmarked and fulfilling the prescribed 
qualifications is found even after the vacancy has been advertised twice, the appointing 
authority may fill up the vacancy on open merit on contract in the following manner, 
namely:— 
(i) 
contract appointment shall be made initially for a period of one year, 
and if the post falls under the purview of the Federal Public Service 
Commission, the Commission shall be informed about contract 
appointment; 
(ii) 
if nomination is not received from the Federal Public Service 
Commission within one year, contract appointment may in the public 
interest be extended for another one year; and  
(iii) the Federal Public Service Commission shall ensure that the 
nominations of the qualified candidates are made within a period of 
two years. If Federal Public Service Commission does not find a 
                                                          
* Subs. & Inserted vide Establishment Division‘s S.R.O No. 747(1)/2020 dated 19-08-2020. 
 Subs. vide Establishment Division‘s Notification S.R.O NO. 146(I)/84, dated 9-2-1984. 
 Subs.vide Estt. Div.‘s S.R.O No. 634(I)/2019 dated 17-06-2019. 
@ Subs. and added vide Establishment Division‘s Notification S.R.O. No. 784(I)/2002, dated 7-11-2002.  

Page -334                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-4 
 
 
suitable candidate, it shall advise the appointing authority, for the 
extension in the contract]. 
 
[Provided further that where the post of Head of an Organization is reserved 
for promotion and in the absence of suitable person, the post is required to be filled by 
initial appointment in accordance with the provisions of Recruitment Rules, the 
appointing authority may fill up the vacancy on open merit on contract basis and where 
such post is reserved for initial appointment, it may be filled on regular basis on open 
merit.]  
 
15. 
Vacancies in posts in [basic pay scales [6 to 15] and equivalent] in 
offices which serve only a particular province or region shall be filled by appointment of persons 
domiciled in the province or region concerned ***[strictly in accordance with the provisions 
contained in the recruitment rules of the post concerned] @[:] 
 
@[Provided that vacancies in such posts in basic pay scales 6 to 15 and equivalent 
which serve only the region of Islamabad Capital Territory (ICT) shall not, at any time by initial 
appointment, be filled less than fifty percent of persons domiciled in the ICT.  
 
Provided further that the first proviso shall not be applicable to the vacancies in posts, 
as specified in clause (ii) of rule 14, in such offices of the Federal Government whose functional 
jurisdiction extends beyond the region of Islamabad Capital Territory e.g. Federal 
Ministries/Divisions, Regulatory Authorities, Corporations/Departments with a federal charter 
extending beyond Islamabad Capital Territory. In such organizations, regional/provincial quotas 
shall be applicable.]  
 
16.  Vacancies in posts in **[basic pay scales @@[1 to 5] and equivalent] shall 
ordinarily be filled on local basis @@@[**] #[:] 
 
#[Provided that vacancies in such posts in basic pay scales 1 to 5 and equivalent 
in all offices situated within ICT shall not, at any time by initial appointment, be filled 
less than fifty percent from amongst the persons domiciled in the ICT.]  
 
17. 
##[Except any law provides otherwise, a candidate for] appointment must 
be in good mental and bodily health and free from any physical defect likely to interfere 
with the discharge of his duties. A candidate who after such medical examination as 
Government may prescribe is found not to satisfy these requirements, shall not be appointed. 
PART-IV.—  AD-HOC AND TEMPORARY APPOINTMENTS 
 
18. ###[When under the Federal Public Service Commission (Functions) Rules, 
1978, a post is required to be filled through the Commission, the appointing authority 
                                                          
 Inserted vide S.R.O No. 208(I)/2017 dated 28-03-2017. 
 Subs.vide Establishment Division Notification S.R.O. No. 146(I)/84, dated 9-2-1984. 
 Subs. & Ins. vide Estt. Div.‘s S.R.O No. 634(I)/2019 dated 17-06-2019. 
@ Subs. & added vide Establishment Division‘s S.R.O No.791(I)/2020 dated 24-08-2020. 
@@ Subs. vide Estt. Div.‘s S.R.O No. 634(I)/2019 dated 17-06-2019. 
@@@ The word ―through balloting‖ Omitted vide Estt. Div.‘s S.R.O No. 198(I)/2020 dated 11-03-2020. 
# Subs. & added vide Establishment Division‘s S.R.O No.791(I)/2020 dated 24-08-2020. 
## Subs.vide Estt. Div.‘s S.R.O No. 855(I)/2019 dated 19-07-2019. 
### Subs. vide Establishment Division S.R.O. No.122(I)/2000, dated 15-3-2000. 
 

 CHAPTER-4                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page - 335 
 
 
shall forward a requisition to the Commission on a prescribed form immediately. In 
exceptional cases, ad-hoc appointment may, however, be made for a period of six months 
or less with prior clearance of the Commission as provided in rule 19. 
 
 19.  When the appointing authority considers it to be in public interest to fill a 
post falling within the purview of the Commission urgently pending nomination of a 
candidate by the Commission, it may proceed to fill it on ad-hoc basis for a period of six 
months or less after obtaining prior clearance of the Commission. The post shall be 
advertised and the same procedures as laid down for initial appointment in Part III shall 
be followed in making ad-hoc appointments]. 
 
 20.   Short term vacancies in the posts falling within the purview of the 
Commission and vacancies occurring as a result of creation of temporary posts for a 
period not exceeding six months, may be filled by the appointing authority otherwise that 
through the Commission on a purely temporary basis after advertising the vacancy. 
 
*20A.  Appointment on deputation.— (1) A person in the service of a Provincial 
Government or an autonomous, semi-autonomous body or corporation or any other 
organization set-up, established owned, managed or controlled by the Federal Government 
who possesses the minimum educational qualifications, experience or comparable length of 
service prescribed for a post shall be eligible for appointment to the said post on deputation for 
a period not exceeding three years which may be extended for another period of two years on 
such terms and conditions as may be sanctioned [by the appointing authority] in consultation 
with the lending Organization. 
 
(2) 
Subject to any rule or orders on the subject **[*****] a civil servant who 
fulfills the conditions and is considered suitable may be sent on deputation to an 
autonomous, semi-autonomous body or corporation established by law or to the 
Provincial Government on such terms and conditions as may be decided by the lending 
and borrowing organizations. 
 
(3) 
In case of appointment under sub-rule (1) or sub-rule (2) pension contribution 
shall invariably be made by the borrowing organizations. 
 
*** Provided that posting of serving husband and wife at the same station, unmarried 
female government servants at the place of residence of their parents/family and that of 
married female government servants at the place of residence/posting of their husbands who 
are not in government employment shall be exempted from the said rule.  
@PART V –- PROBATION 
 
21. (1) Persons appointed by initial appointment, promotion or transfer shall be on 
probation for a period of one year. 
 
(2) 
The period of probation may be curtailed for good and sufficient reasons, 
to be recorded, or, if considered necessary, it may be extended for a period not exceeding 
one year as may be specified at the time of appointment. 
                                                          
* Inserted vide Estab. Div. Notification No. 3/54/2006-R.2, dated the 3rd May, 2007. 
 Subs. & omitted vide Estt. Div.‘s S.R.O No. 855(I)/2019 dated 19-07-2019. 
*** Inserted vide Estt. Division‘s Notification S.R.O No.375(I)/2012 dated 16-04-2012.  
@ Added vide Establishment Division Notification S.R.O. No. 968(I)/82, dated 21-9-1982. 

Page -336                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-4 
 
 
 
(3) 
On the successful completion of probation period, the appointing authority 
shall, by specific order, terminate the probation. 
 
(4) 
If no order is issued under sub-rule (3), on the expiry of the first year of 
probation period, the period of probation shall be deemed to have been extended under sub-
rule (2): 
 
Provided that, subject to the provisions of proviso to sub-section (2) of section 6 of the 
Civil Servants Act, 1973 in the absence of an order under sub-rule (3), the period of probation 
shall, on the expiry of the extended period under sub-rule (2), be deemed to have successfully 
been completed. 
[Authority:— Estt. Div.‘s Notification S.R.O.No.1498(I)/73, dated 20-10-1973]. 
 
1.3 
Amendment in the Recruitment  
Rules of Civil Posts 
 
In pursuance of sub-rule(2) of rule 3 of the Civil Servants (Appointment, 
Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973 recruitment rules of civil posts are made by 
Ministries/Divisions in consultation with the Establishment Division. Where the 
recruitment rules provide for filling a post through promotion, the following standard 
proviso is laid down in Rule-2 (Method of Appointment):— 
―Provided that if no suitable person is available for promotion, 
the post or posts reserved for promotion shall be filled by 
initial appointment and failing that by transfer.‖ 
 
2. 
Sometimes it may be necessary, in the public interest, to fill promotion 
posts through temporary transfer / posting of a highly qualified civil servant or by 
deputation of a highly qualified employee of a public sector corporation. In order to make 
an enabling provision for this purpose in the recruitment rules, the Chief Executive has 
been pleased to approve that the following proviso shall be added below the above cited 
proviso in the recruitment rules of all civil posts:- 
―Provided further that if no suitable person is available for 
promotion to a post, it may be filled, in the public interest, by 
temporary transfer/ posting of a civil servant, or by deputation 
of an employee of a public sector corporation, in consultation 
with his appointing authority‖ 
 
3. 
Similar proviso may be incorporated in recruitment rules that may be 
made by Ministries/Divisions in future.  
 [Authority:– Estab. Div.‘s OM No. 9/2/2002-R.5, dated 28th October, 2002] 
 
1.4 
Civil Servants (Confirmation) Rules, 1993 
 
In exercise of the powers conferred by section 25 of the Civil Servants Act, 1973 
(LXXI of 1973), the President is pleased to make the following rules, namely:- 

 CHAPTER-4                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page - 337 
 
 
 
1. 
Short title, Commencement and application.– (1) These Rules, may be 
called the Civil Servants (Confirmation) Rules, 1993.  
 
(2) 
They shall come into force at once. 
 
(3) 
They shall apply to all civil servants. 
 
2.  
Definitions.– In these Rules, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject 
or context, 
(a)  
―Foreign Service‖ means service in which a civil servant receives his pay 
with the sanction of Government from any source other than the Federal 
Consolidated Fund; and 
(b)  ―lien‖ means the title of a civil servant to hold substantively a post on which 
he has been confirmed. 
 
3. 
General Principles of confirmation.– (1) A civil servant initially appointed 
to a post, on probation including a civil servant promoted or appointed to a post on transfer, 
shall on satisfactory completion of his probation, be eligible for confirmation in that post: 
 
Provided that the confirmation shall be made only against a permanent post: 
 
Provided further that two or more civil servants shall not be confirmed in the same 
post and at the same time or in a post on which another civil servant holds a lien: 
 
Provided also that a civil servant shall not be confirmed on two or more posts at the 
same time. 
 
(2) 
A civil servant shall be considered for confirmation strictly in order of his 
seniority. 
 
(3)  No confirmation shall be made against the post vacated on dismissal, 
removal or compulsory retirement of a civil servant until his appeal against such dismissal 
or, as the case may be, removal or retirement is finally decided. 
 
4. 
The confirmation shall be made on the recommendations of the Confirmation 
Committee constituted for the purpose and with the approval of the authorities specified 
below:—  
Posts 
Composition of the Committees 
Confirming 
authorities 
Remarks 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Posts in BPS 20 
and above 
Secretary of the Administrative Ministry or 
an 
authority 
controlling 
the 
Service/ 
Cadre/Post 
as 
Chairman, 
Additional 
Secretary or a Joint Secretary  where there is 
no Additional Secretary in the Ministry 
concerned, 
and 
Addl. 
Secretary 
Estt. 
Division as Members.  If posts are in an 
Attached Department or Subordinate Office, 
the Head of the Attached Department or 
Head of Office, who controls the particular 
Service/ Cadre/Post may be appointed as Co-
opted Member. 
Prime Minister 
 

Page -338                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-4 
 
 
Posts 
Composition of the Committees 
Confirming 
authorities 
Remarks 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Posts in BPS 17 to 
19 
 
Additional Secretary or Joint Secretary 
where there is no Additional Secretary in the 
Administrative Ministry controlling the 
Service/Cadre/ Post as Chairman, and a Joint 
Secretary and a Senior Deputy Secretary of 
the Ministry concerned as Members. If posts 
are in an Attached Department or a 
Subordinate Office, the head of the Attached 
Department or Head of Office who controls 
the particular  Service/ Cadre/Post may be 
appointed as Co-opted Member. 
Secretary of the 
Administrative 
Ministry/Division 
who controls the 
particular 
Service/ 
Cadre/Post. 
 
 
FOR POST IN BPS 3 TO 16 
Posts in BPS 11 to 
16 
An Officer holding the post in BPS 20 as 
Chairman and two officers holding the 
post in BPS 19 as Members. 
Secretary of the 
Ministry/ Division 
concerned or Head 
of 
Department 
provided 
he 
is 
holding the post in 
BPS 20 or above. 
The Administrative 
Ministry 
will 
constitute 
separate 
committees for posts 
in 
the 
Ministries/ 
Divisions 
and 
Attached Departm-
ents/ 
Subordinate 
Offices. 
Posts in BPS 10 
and below: 
An Officer in BPS 19 as Chairman and 
two Officers in BPS 18 as Members. 
FOR POSTS IN BPS 1 TO 2 
 
 
Dy. Secretary of the Ministry/ Division 
concerned or Head of Deptt. or Head of 
Office  provided he is holding the post in 
BPS 19 or above. 
 
 
 
 
 
[Provided that in case no post of Joint Secretary or Deputy Secretary exists or the 
number of such officers in less than the required number in the administrative Ministry or 
Division for the constitution of the Confirmation Committee, other officers of BPS 20 and 
BPS 19 in the concerned Ministry or Division may be included in the Committee: 
 
Provided further that in case there is no post in BPS 20 and BPS 19, officer of one-
step below status in the concerned Ministry or Division may be included in the Confirmation 
Committee with the approval of Establishment Division]. 
 
5. 
Acquiring of lien.- (1) On confirmation in a permanent post, a civil servant 
shall acquire a lien in that post and shall retain it during the period when he— 
                                                          
 Added by SRO No. 104(I)/97, dated 4.2.1997.  

 CHAPTER-4                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page - 339 
 
 
(a) 
holds a temporary post other than a post in a service or cadre against which 
he was originally appointed; 
(b) 
holds a post on deputation with a foreign government, an international 
organisation, a multinational corporation or any other organisation outside 
Pakistan; 
(c) 
holds a post in Foreign Service in Pakistan; 
(d) 
is on leave; 
(e) 
is called for duty in the Armed Forces as reservist of Armed Forces of 
Pakistan; 
(f) 
is under suspension; and 
(g) 
is on joining time on transfer to another post. 
 
(2) 
A civil servant acquiring lien as referred in sub-rule (1), shall cease to hold 
lien acquired previously on any other post. 
 
6. 
Termination of lien.- (1) The lien of a civil servant who is reduced in rank 
or reverted to a lower post as a consequence of action taken against him under the 
Government Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 1973, shall be terminated against 
the post from which he is reduced in rank or, as the case may be, reverted to a lower post: 
 
Provided that such civil servant shall acquire a lien against the lower post. 
 
(2) 
A civil servant shall cease to hold lien against a post if he takes up an 
appointment on selection in an autonomous body under the control of Federal Government, 
Provincial Government, local authority or private organisation. 
 
(3) 
Notwithstanding the consent of a civil servant, his lien on a post under the 
Federal Government shall not be terminated until he acquires lien on any other post. 
 
(4) 
A confirmed civil servant who, of his own accord, joins some other service, 
post or cadre on regular basis shall have, after being selected through a regular selection 
process, the right of reversion to the previous post against which he shall hold lien only 
during the period of his probation on his new service, post or cadre. 
 
7.  
Repeal.—All existing orders and instructions relating to confirmation of civil 
servants issued from time to time are hereby repealed. 
[Authority:– Estt. Div.‘s Notification No. S.R.O. 285(1)/93, dated 15-4-1993]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
 Implies deputation. 

Page -340                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-4 
 
 
I. 
GENERAL CONDITION FOR APPOINTMENTS 
2.1 
Conditions for Appointment, Promotion 
and Transfer Rules for Assistant Incharge,  
Stenotypist, Assistant, UDC and LDC 
 
In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-rule (2) of rule-3 of the Civil 
Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973, the following method, 
qualifications and other conditions are laid down for appointment to the under-mentioned 
ministerial posts in the Ministries/ Divisions/Departments of the Federal Government:—  
Sl. No. 
Designation of Post 
BPS 
1. 
[**] 
* [**] 
2. 
Stenotypist 
(Upgraded BPS-14 w.e.f. 23rd December,2011 vide 
Finance Division‘s O.M.No.19(55) Legal-II/2010-
1055) 
14 
3. 
Assistant 
*15 
4. 
U.D.C.  
*11 
5. 
L.D.C  
*09 
METHOD OF APPOINTMENT 
 
2. 
The method of appointment to the posts shall be as under:— 
Sl. 
No. 
Designation and BPS of the post 
Method of Appointment 
By Promotion 
% 
By initial 
appointment  % 
1. 
*[***] 
*[**] 
*[*] 
2. 
Stenotypist (BPS 14) 
— 
100% 
3. 
Assistant *(BPS 15)  
50% 
50% 
4. 
U.D.C. *(BPS 11)  
50% 
50% 
5. 
L.D.C. *(BPS 09)  
*20% 
*80% 
Provided that: 
(i) 
if no suitable person is available/eligible for promotion to the posts of 
Assistant Incharge the posts shall be filled in by transfer. 
(ii) 
failing promotion, the posts of Assistant, U.D.C. and L.D.C. shall be filled 
in by initial appointment and failing that by transfer: 
(iii) failing initial appointment, the post of Stenotypist shall be filled in by 
appointment by transfer. 
                                                          
Deleted & subs. vide Estt. Div.‘s Notification S.R.O No.920(I)/2016 dated 22-09-2016. 

 CHAPTER-4                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page - 341 
 
 
CONDITIONS FOR PROMOTION 
 
3.  
Promotion to posts in column (2) below shall be made by selection from 
amongst persons holding posts specified in column (3) on a regular basis and fulfill the 
conditions prescribed in column (4). 
Sl. 
No. 
Designation and BPS of 
the post 
Person eligible 
Conditions of eligibility 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
1. 
[***] 
*[***] 
*[*****] 
2. 
Assistant (BPS 15)* 
U.D.C (BPS-11)* 
03 years service as U.D.C 
*[6 weeks Basic IT Training Course (including 
MS Office conducted by NITB)] 
3. 
U.D.C. (BPS 11)* 
L.D.C. (BPS-09)* 
03 years service as L.D.C 
*[3 weeks Basic IT Training Course (including 
MS Office conducted by NITB)] 
[4. 
L.D.C. (BPS 09) 
Employees holding 
posts in BPS-08 and 
below. 
(i) Matric with a minimum typing speed of 30 
w.p.m. 
(ii) 3 weeks Basic IT Training Course 
(including MS Office conducted by 
NITB)] 
 
[Provided that, subject to prescribed eligibility criteria, an official who is 
likely to retire, within two years from service, on attaining the age of superannuation, 
shall be exempted from the mandatory training of NITB.]  
QUALIFICATION, EXPERIENCE AND AGE LIMIT  
FOR INITIAL APPOINTMENT 
 
4.  
On the closing date for receipt of applications as fixed in the relevant 
advertisement, a candidate for initial appointment to a post must possess the educational 
qualifications and experience and must be within the age limit as mentioned against the 
post concerned in the Schedule to this notification: 
Provided that the maximum age limit shall be relaxed in respect of the 
candidates specified, and to the extent indicated, in the Initial Appointment to Civil Posts 
(Relaxation of Upper Age Limit) Rules, 1993, as amended from time to time. 
QUALIFICATIONS / CONDITIONS FOR  
APPOINTMENT BY TRANSFER 
 
5.  
Appointment by transfer shall be made in accordance with the provisions 
of Rule-7 and 9 of Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973. 
PROBATION 
 
6.  
Persons appointed by promotion or initial appointment or transfer shall be 
on probation in accordance with the provision of Section 6 of Civil Servants Act, 1973 read 
with Rule 21 of the Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973. 
                                                          
 Deleted & subs. vide Estt. Div.‘s Notification S.R.O No. 920(I)/2016 dated 22-09-2016. 
 Subs. vide Establishment Division‘s S.R.O No. 286(I)/2020 dated 12th March, 2020. 
 Inserted vide Establishment Division‘s Notification S.R.O No. 1455(I)/2020 dated 29-12-2020. 

Page -342                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-4 
 
 
 
7.  
The Recruitment Rules of Ministerial posts notified vide S.R.O. No. 
1077(I)/2005, dated 15-10-2005, amended from time to time, are hereby repealed. 
SCHEDULE 
(See para 4) 
S. 
No. 
Designation and BPS of 
the post 
Qualification/ Experience 
Age Limit 
Minimum 
Maximum 
1. 
Stenotypist(BPS-14) 
(i) Intermediate. 
(ii) Minimum speed of 80/40 w.p.m in 
shorthand/typing respectively. 
(iii) Must be computer literate 
18 years 
25 years 
2. 
Assistant (BPS-15) 
Graduate 
*[6 weeks Basic IT Training Course 
(including MS Office conducted by 
NITB)] 
18 years 
28 years 
3. 
U.D.C (BPS-11)* 
Intermediate  
*[3 weeks Basic IT Training Course 
(including MS Office conducted by 
NITB)] 
18 years 
25 years 
4. 
L.D.C. (BPS-09)* 
(i) Matric. 
(ii) Minimum typing speed of 30 w.p.m  
(iii)*[3 weeks Basic IT Training Course 
(including MS Office conducted by NITB)] 
18 years 
25 years 
 
 
[Authority:– Estt. Div.‘s SRO 139(I)/2012, dated 31st January, 2012] 
2.2 
Conditions for Appointment, Promotion and Transfer Rules  
for Private Secretary, Superintendent and **Assistant Private 
Secretary  
 
In exercise of powers conferred by sub-rule (2) of rule-3 of the Civil Servants 
(Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973, and Section-7 (1)(b)(i)&(ii) of 
FPSC Ordinance, 1977 (XLV of 1977), the following method, qualifications and other 
conditions are laid down for appointment to the following posts in the 
Ministries/Divisions/ Departments of the Federal Government:— 
S.No. 
Designation 
BPS 
1. 
Private Secretary 
17 
2. 
Superintendent  
Grant 
BPS-17 
w.e.f. 
10th 
September,2014 
vide 
Finance 
Division 
O.M.No.1(3)/R-I/2010/2014. 
16 
3. 
Assistant Private Secretary 
(Upgraded BPS-16 w.e.f. 23rd December, 2011 vide Finance Division‘s 
O.M.No.19(55) Legal-II/2010-1055 and re-designated as Assistant Private 
Secretary w.e.f. 28th Feb.,2013 vide Finance Division‘s O.M.No.1(110)-R-
I/2012-124-13). 
16 
                                                          
 Subs. vide Estt. Div.‘s Notification S.R.O No.920(I)/2016 dated 22-09-2016. 
The brackets/words/figures ―Stenographer (BPS-16)‖, wherever occurring shall be substituted with the 
 brackets/words/figures ―Assistant Private Secretary (BPS-16)‖ vide Establishment Division‘s S.R.O No. 
 785(I)/2013 dated 23-07-2013.  

 CHAPTER-4                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page - 343 
 
 
METHOD OF APPOINTMENT 
 
2. 
The method of appointment to the posts shall be as under:— 
Sl. 
No. 
Designation and BPS of the post 
Method of Appointment 
By Promotion 
(%) 
By initial 
appointment 
(%) 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
1. 
Private Secretary (BPS-17) 
100% 
— 
2. 
Superintendent (BPS-16) 
100% 
— 
3. 
Assistant Private Secretary (BPS-16)  
50% 
50% 
 
Provided that:— 
(i) if no suitable person is available/eligible for promotion to the posts of 
Superintendent and Private Secretary the posts shall be filled by transfer. 
(ii) failing initial appointment the posts of *Stenographer shall be filled in by 
transfer.  
CONDITIONS FOR PROMOTION 
 
3.  
Promotion to posts in column (2) below shall be made by selection from 
amongst the persons who hold the posts specified in column (3) on a regular basis and 
fulfill the conditions of eligibility as  prescribed in column (4):— 
Sl. 
No. 
Designation and BPS  
of the post 
Person eligible 
Conditions of eligibility 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
1. 
Private Secretary (BPS-17) 
*Assistant Private Secretary (BPS-16) 03 years service as *Assistant 
Private Secretary. 
2. 
*Assistant Private Secretary 
(BPS-16) 
Stenotypist (BPS-14) 
03 years service as 
Stenotypist. 
3. 
Superintendent (BPS-16) 
Assistant Incharge (BPS-15)/ 
Assistant (BPS-15) 
03 years service as Assistant 
Incharge or 05 years service 
as Assistant. 
 
QUALIFICATION, EXPERIENCE AND AGE LIMIT  
FOR INITIAL APPOINTMENT 
 
4.  
A candidate must possess the educational qualifications and must be 
within the age limits as mentioned against the posts concerned in the Schedule to this 
Notification provided that:— 
(i) 
the maximum age limit shall be relaxed in respect of the candidates 
specified and to the extent indicated in the Initial Appointment to Civil 
Posts (Relaxation of Upper Age Limit) Rules,1993 as amended from time 
to time; and 
                                                          
The brackets/words/figures ―Stenographer (BPS-16)‖, wherever occurring shall be substituted with the 
 brackets/words/figures ―Assistant Private Secretary (BPS-16)‖ vide Establishment Division‘s S.R.O No. 
 785(I)/2013 dated 23-07-2013. 
 Subs. vide Estt. Div.‘s Notification S.R.O No.920(I)/2016 dated 22-09-2016. 

Page -344                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-4 
 
 
(ii) 
eligibility of candidates shall be reckoned, as on the closing date fixed for 
submission of applications in accordance with these Recruitment Rules 
and the Instructions issued by the Federal Government and the Federal 
Public Service Commission from time to time. 
APPOINTMENT BY TRANSFER 
            5.     Appointment by transfer shall be made by selection from amongst the 
persons holding appointment on a regular basis under the Federal Government in the 
same basic pay scale in which the post to be filled exists, provided that the person 
concerned possesses the qualifications and experience prescribed for initial appointment 
to the post concerned. 
PROBATION 
           6.      Persons appointed by initial appointment or promotion or transfer shall be on 
probation for a period of one year. This period may be curtailed for good and sufficient 
reasons to be recorded, or if considered necessary, it may be extended for a period not 
exceeding one year as may be specified at the time of appointment. Appointment or 
probation shall be subject to the provisions of Section 6 of the Civil Servants Act, 1973 read 
with Rule 21 of the Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973. 
           7.    This Notification issues with the concurrence of the FPSC vide its letter 
No.F.2-4/2012-RR, dated 18-04-2012 and supersedes Establishment Division‘s S.R.O 
1077(I)/ 2005, dated 15-10-2005 as amended from time to time to the extent of the post 
of Assistant Private Secretary and Superintendent and S.R.O 99(KE)/87, dated 22nd  
October, 1987. 
SCHEDULE 
(See Rule 4) 
 
S. No. 
Designation and BPS 
of the post 
Qualification/ Experience 
Age Limit
Minimum  
Maximum 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
1. 
*Assistant Private 
Secretary (BPS-16) 
(i) Second class or Grade ―C‖ 
Bachelor‘s  degree from a 
University recognized by HEC. 
(ii) A minimum speed of 100/50 
w.p.m 
in 
shorthand/typing 
respectively. 
(iii)  Must be computer literate.  
20 Years 
28 Years 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Authority:— Estt. Div‘s S.R.O. No. 526(I)/2012 dated 18-04-2012]. 
 
                                                          
 The brackets/words/figures ―Stenographer (BPS-16)‖, wherever occurring shall be substituted with the 
 brackets/words/figures ―Assistant Private Secretary (BPS-16)‖ vide Establishment Division‘s S.R.O No. 
 785(I)/2013 dated 23-07-2013. 

 CHAPTER-4                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page - 345 
 
 
2.3 
Method and Conditions of Appointment  
to Posts in BPS 4 and Below 
In pursuance of sub-rule (2) of rule 3 of the Civil Servants (Appointment, 
Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973, the following method, qualifications and other 
conditions are laid down for appointment to the post in BPS 4 and below in the Ministries 
and Divisions, Attached Departments and Sub-ordinate Offices under the Federal 
Government: 
METHOD OF APPOINTMENT 
 
 
2. 
(1) The method of appointment to the posts shall be as follows: 
 
1. 
(i) Staff Car Driver ( BPS 4)  
(ii) *Omitted 
 
100% by initial appointment 
 
2. 
(i) Despatch Rider ( BPS 4) 
(ii) Omitted 
 
100% by initial appointment 
 
3. 
(i) Duplicating Machine    
    Operator (BPS 4) 
(ii) Omitted 
 
50% by promotion, 
50% by initial appointment 
4. 
(i) Daftry ( BPS 2)  
(ii) Omitted 
 
 
100% by promotion 
5. 
(i) Qasid (BPS 2)  
(ii) Omitted 
 
100% by promotion. 
6. 
Naib Qasid ( BPS 1) 
 
 
100% by initial appointment including 10% 
by Farashes having 10 years satisfactory 
service 
 
 
2. 
Provided that if no suitable person is available for promotion, the post or 
posts reserved for promotion shall be filled by initial appointment and failing that by 
transfer. 
 
3. 
Vacancies in posts in [BPS 1 and 2] shall ordinarily be filled on local 
basis. 
 
4. 
Upto 50 percent of the vacancies in posts in BPS 1- 4 shall be reserved for 
ex-servicemen. 
                                                          
*Omitted vide SRO 1231(1)/2006. 
Note: 'Qasid', literally means 'Messenger', hence Naib (Deputy/Assistant) Qasid. 
 As per Recruitment Policy,2014 see Chapter-03 Sl.No. 1.1 para (iv), BPS-01 to BPS-05 are to be filled on 
local basis. 

Page -346                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-4 
 
 
CONDITIONS FOR PROMOTION 
 
3. 
Promotion to the posts in column 2 below shall be made by selection from 
amongst the persons who hold the posts specified, in column 3 on a regular basis and 
possess the qualifications and experience prescribed in column 4 :- 
 
Sl. No. 
Name & BPS of the 
Post 
Persons eligible 
 
Conditions of eligibility 
 
1. 
Duplicating 
Machine Operator  
( BPS 4) 
[(i) Daftry ( BS- 02) 
(ii) Qasid (BS-02)] 
(i) 3 years service BPS 2 
(ii) Knowledge of operating 
Duplicating Machine essential. 
2. 
Daftry ( BPS 2) 
 Naib Qasid (BPS 1) 
3 years service in BPS 1 
3. 
Qasid ( BPS 2) 
Naib Qasid / Farash ( BPS 1) 
3 years service in BPS 1 
 
 
QUALIFICATION, EXPERIENCE AND AGE LIMITS FOR INITIAL 
APPOINTMENT 
 
4. (1)  
A candidate must possess the educational qualifications and experience 
and must be within the age limits as mentioned against the post concerned in the schedule 
to this notification. 
 
(2) 
Provided that the maximum age limit shall be relaxable in accordance with 
the provisions of Initial Appointment to Civil Posts (Relaxation of Upper Age Limit) 
Rules, 1993. 
 
(3) 
Omitted 
 
(4) 
***Omitted 
 
(5) All the vacancies in posts in BPS 1 - 4 shall be advertised in the press. 
QUALIFICATION / CONDITIONS FOR TRANSFER 
 
5. 
Appointment by transfer shall be made from amongst the persons holding 
posts under the Federal Government on a regular basis in the same Basic Pay Scale in 
which the post to be filled exists provided the person concerned possesses the 
qualifications/experience prescribed for initial appointment or promotion to the post 
concerned. 
PROBATION 
 
6. 
Persons appointed by promotion or initial appointment or transfer shall be 
on probation for a period of one year. This period may be curtailed for good and 
sufficient reasons to be recorded or if considered necessary, it may be extended for a 
                                                          
Amended vide Estt. Division‘s Notification S.R.O.No.1152(I)/2009 dated 31-12-2009. 
 Subs. Estt. Div.‘s Notification SRO 1231(1)/2006, dated 7-12-2000. 
 Omitted vide Estt. Div.‘s Notification SRO 719(1)/2005, dated 13-07-2006. 

 CHAPTER-4                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page - 347 
 
 
period not exceeding one year as may be prescribed at the time of appointment. 
Appointment on probation shall be subject to the provisions of section 6 of Civil Servants 
Act, 1973, read with rule 21 of the Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer 
), Rules, 1973. 
 
7. 
The other provisions specifically applicable to the employees holding 
posts in BPS 1 to 4 are given in the Appendix to this Notification. 
 
8. 
These rules shall not apply to those Government Organisations who have 
their own recruitment rules in respect of the posts included in this Notification. However, 
the terms and conditions specifically applicable to the said employees as given in the 
Appendix to these rules shall also be applicable to them. 
 
9. 
This Notification issues with the concurrence of the Establishment 
Division (R-Wing) as contained in U.O No. F.9/4/90-R-5 dated 29th October, 1990. 
SCHEDULE 
(See para 4) 
 
S. No. 
Designation and BPS 
of the post 
Qualification and Experience 
Max age limit 
 
1. 
Staff Car Driver ( BPS 4) 
(i)   Primary Pass 
(ii) Valid driving license holder and well   
versed in the traffic rules. 
30 years 
 
2. 
Despatch Rider ( BPS 4) 
(i)   Primary Pass. 
30 years 
 
 
(ii) Valid driving license holder and    
well versed in the traffic rules. 
 
3. 
Duplicating Machine  
(i)   Primary Pass. 
25 years 
 
Operator 
(ii)  Knowledge of operating                    
duplicating machine essential. 
 
4. 
Daftry ( BPS 2) 
Primary Pass. 
25 years 
5. 
Qasid ( BPS 2) 
Primary Pass. 
25 years 
6. 
Naib Qasid ( BPS 1) 
Primary Pass. 
25 years 
Note – 1. 
The candidates should be put through an elementary test in reading and 
writing and an interview by the Departmental Selection Committee, Marks 
should be awarded in ratio of 40% for the test and 60% for interview. 
Note – 2. 
In case of technical appointment such as Drivers, Despatch Riders, 
Duplicating Machine Operators etc. marks may be awarded in the ratio 
of 60% for practical and reading and writing test and 40% for 
interview. 
Note – 3. 
In case of Drivers/Despatch Riders, in addition to the routine medical 
examination, the report shall also cover drug addicts. Drivers/Despatch 
Riders shall be required to undergo such medical test every year to 
ensure safe driving. However, if considered necessary, the Drivers/ 
Despatch Riders may be required to undergo the said medical 
examination during any period of the year in addition to their annual 
medical examination. 

Page -348                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-4 
 
 
Note – 4 Omitted 
Note – 5 
The minimum academic qualification for initial appointments to  
BPS 1 posts (other than the post of Naib Qasid) shall be primary pass 
and the maximum age limit shall be 25 years. 
[Authority:– Estt. Div.‘s S.R.O 1302(1)/90, dated 15th December, 1990]. 
 
2.4 
Physical Fitness 
 
Please consult Fundamental Rules 10 and 10-A and Supplementary Rules 3, 4 & 
4-A of the Compilation of Fundamental & Supplementary Rules, Vol.I, regarding 
determination of physical fitness of government servants on first appointment and during 
service. 
 
2.5 
Verification of Antecedents 
 on First Appointment 
 
Revised procedure for verification of antecedents of government employees.– In 
supersession of all previous instructions on the subject, it has now been decided, in 
consultation with the Intelligence Bureau, to introduce a simplified and less time-consuming 
procedure for the verification of antecedents of employees at the time of their first 
appointment in government service. 
 
2. 
According to the revised procedure, all Federal Government Ministries/ 
Divisions/Departments, including Federal Public Service Commission, will make 
simultaneous references for security clearance of fresh employees to the following agencies:- 
 
 
(a) 
Intelligence Bureau, Government of Pakistan. 
 
(b) 
District Police. 
 
(c) 
Special Branch of Provincial Police concerned. 
 
3. 
The Intelligence Bureau has undertaken to give a political record check of the 
candidates direct to the departments concerned within a maximum period of one month.  In 
case a report from the Intelligence Bureau is not received within one month, the department 
concerned will allow the selected candidates to join their posts on production of character 
certificates from two government officers not below BPS-17. It will, however, be understood 
that the appointees will remain on probation for a period of six months or till the receipt of 
their vetting report.  During the probationary period, the new appointees will not be entrusted 
with sensitive duties/assignments. 
                                                          
Omitted vide Estt. Div.‘s Notification SRO 1231(1)/2006, dated 7-12-2006. 
FR 10, 10-A: Medical Certificate of health on appointment to government service; appearance before a 
medical  
authority for medical examination. 
SR 3, 4, 4-A: Medical Certificate of fitness for government service to be signed by a medical officer; 
 
exemptions from producing medical certificate to specified classes of government servants or nature of 
 
appointment e.g. temporary/short term or re-employment. 

 CHAPTER-4                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page - 349 
 
 
 
4. 
The District Police and the Special Branch concerned will be required to give 
clearance in respect of the character and antecedents of fresh/entrants in government service 
within a maximum period of two months.  These agencies will return the verification rolls, 
after conducting local enquiries, direct to the department concerned and not through the 
Intelligence Bureau except in cases where the conduct of the candidate has come to adverse 
notice and this aspect is considered relevant to his appointment in government service. 
[Authority.– Cabinet Division‘s letter No. 12(3)/76-MW(S), dated 31-5-1977]. 
[Note.- The prescribed form for verification of character and antecedents of candidates 
selected for appointment under the Federal Government is Form S. 190. 

Page -350                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-4 
 
 
(ANNEX) 
(See Sl. No. 2.5) 
 
        Form S.190(Revised) 
 
PHOTO 
 
GOVERNMENT OF.................. 
Federal Public Service Commission               
Ministry/Division/Office 
 
 
 
Verification Roll for candidates for appointment under the Government to be filled 
in by the candidate in his own handwriting. 
                                                                                  
1.  
The name of the post in which the candidate to be appointed............................. 
                                                                                  
2.  
Full 
name 
(in 
block 
letters) 
with 
surname 
and 
aliases 
if 
any 
Mr./Miss/Mrs............................ 
                                                                                   
3.      Previous name (if any) and reasons for change........................................... 
                                                                                  
4.     Father's name in full with occupation and income (if any)............................. 
                                                                                  
5.     Date and place of birth of the candidate   
 
give full address...........................................    
 
                                                                                 
6.      Description 
    
a.  
(1) Height........................ 
 
       
(2) Build i.e., heavy/medium/light.............. 
 
       
(3) Frame i.e., large/medium/thin............... 
       
 
(4) Complexion................... 
 
       
(5) Colour of hair................. 
                (6) Colour of eyes......... 
 
 
(7) Visible marks of identification............. 
 
 
b.  
(1) Religion by birth............ 
 
 
(2) Present Religion............. 
 
7. 
Residential address (with telephone number if any) 
a. 
Present....................... 
b. 
Permanent...................... 
8. 
Nationality: 
 
a. 
Pakistan National by birth/migration/naturalization 

 CHAPTER-4                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page - 351 
 
 
 
b. 
If naturalized/migrated: 
 
 
(1) 
Previous nationality and address............... 
 
 
(2) 
Date of migration........... 
 
 
(3) 
Citizenship/Naturalization Certificate Particulars i.e No. date and 
place of issue etc........................ 
 
c. 
National Identity Card No., date and place of issue. 
9. 
Local and other addresses during the last 10 years where the candidate has stayed 
for more than six months. 
 
 
 
Address 
 
 
 
From 
 
To 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10. 
Educational qualifications showing places of education from the age of 10 years. 
 
Name and place of 
school and college 
etc. 
From 
To 
Major field 
of study 
Certificate/ 
diploma degree obtained 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page -352                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-4 
 
 
 Note.- A certificate of good character from the Head of Educational Institution last 
attended by the candidate (to be attached). 
 
11. 
Knowledge of language: 
 
Can understand 
 
Can speak 
 
 
Can write 
                                                                                  
 
 
 
                                                                                 
12. 
Special training, any field............... 
                                                                                  
13. 
Any distinctions obtained in literary, sports or miscellaneous fields: 
                                                                                  
14. 
a. 
Are you capable of sustained physical and mental activity? 
 
 
.............................................................. 
 
 
b. 
Have you had any serious illness or any operation in the past three years? 
 
 
c. 
How many days you lost from work in the past three years? 
                                                                                  
15.    Has there been any case of mental/nervous illness in your close relatives? 
....................................... 
                                                                                  
16. 
a. 
Do you take alcohol? 
b. 
Do you gamble?     
   
17. 
a. 
Government offices or firms, with full description and addresses where 
the candidate previously worked, and the reasons for leaving: 
 
Offices/ 
Firms 
Designation and Pay 
From 
To 
Reasons for leaving 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
b. 
Present occupation if any: 
 
Offices/ 
Firms 
Designation and Pay 
From 
To 
Reasons for leaving 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 CHAPTER-4                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page - 353 
 
 
 
Note.- 
Certificate of performance from the Head of the Institution last served by 
the applicant (to be attached). 
 
18. 
Offices/firms with full descriptions and addresses where the candidate previously 
applied without success: 
 
Office/Firm 
When applied for 
appointment 
Job for which applied 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19. 
Particulars of wife (or husband as the case may be) of the candidate: 
 
 
a. 
Full name with father's name........................... 
 
b. 
Nationality ....................... 
 
c. 
Religion........................... 
 
d. 
Date of birth..................... 
 
e. 
Place of birth................... 
 
f. 
Occupation, if any.............. 
 
g. 
Income, if any..................... 
                                                                                  
 
20. 
Particulars of children: 
                                                                                  
 
Name 
Sex 
Date of Birth 
Recent Address 
 
a. ....................................................................... 
 
b. ....................................................................... 
 
c. ....................................................................... 
 
d. ....................................................................... 
 
21. 
Particulars of children or dependents educated or receiving education: 
 
 
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
a. Name of Child 
b. Relationship 
c. Name of institution 
d. City/country 
e. Period of education abroad 
f. How financed 
 
 
 
 
 

Page -354                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-4 
 
 
22. 
Full particulars of the candidate's near relations, who are in Government service in 
Pakistan and elsewhere, specifying the posts held, and where posted. 
 
Name of relations 
Relationship 
Post held 
Place of duty 
 
 
 
 
 
23. 
Particulars of near relatives/dependents abroad: 
 
Name with  
 
Nationality 
 
Occupation  
Place of  
Relationship 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Resident 
a. .................................................. 
b. .................................................. 
c. .................................................. 
d. ................................................. 
e. ................................................. 
f. .................................................. 
g. ................................................. 
h. ................................................. 
24.  (a)  Assets: 
 
Immovable  
 
 
Value 
 
Mode of acquiring 
  ..........  
 
 
 ....... 
 
          ........ 
  ..........  
 
 
 ....... 
 
          ........ 
  ..........  
 
 
 ....... 
 
          ........ 
 
(b) Movable of more than Rs. 10,000/- 
 
.......................................................................... 
 
.......................................................................... 
 
 
 
Total value.......................................................... 
 
25. 
Membership of Clubs, Political Parties and Associations (Past and Present) (Name 
of Organization with date of joining and leaving): 
 
Name of Club, Party 
 
             From 
 
 
To 
 
a. ..................................... 
 
b. ..................................... 
 
c. ..................................... 
 
d. ..................................... 
 
e. ..................................... 
                                                                                 
26. 
Details of Travels Abroad (including travels for education or training): 
a. Passport particulars, if any.................... 
 
including No., date and place of issue................. 
 
b. Countries for which valid.............................. 
 
c. Issuing authority.................... 
 
d. Period of validity.................. 

 CHAPTER-4                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                          Page - 355 
 
 
27. 
Names with addresses of at least two references in Pakistan who can testify to 
the candidate's character and antecedents: 
 
 
Name 
 
 
 
Address 
 
------------- 
 
---------------------------------------------- 
 
------------- 
 
---------------------------------------------- 
 
------------- 
 
---------------------------------------------- 
 
28. 
Name and address of your close friends:                                                                     
 
Name 
 
 
Address 
 
-------------- 
 
---------------------------------------------- 
 
-------------- 
 
---------------------------------------------- 
 
-------------- 
 
---------------------------------------------- 
                                                                                  
29. 
Whether arrested, prosecuted, convicted, restricted or externed in any case, 
political or otherwise, if so full particulars including dates should be 
furnished.............. 
 
30. 
Finger prints: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Place---------------- Date---------------- Signature--------------------- 
a. 
I....................... candidate for appointment to............hereby certify and solemnly 
affirm that my answers to the above questions are correct to the best of my 
knowledge and belief. 
b. 
I fully understand that if the above statement is false in any material respect, or 
omits any material information my appointment is liable to be rejected/ 
terminated and shall render me to legal and disciplinary action including 
dismissal if I am already in Government service. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Signature.................... 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Place........................ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Date......................... 
 
To be filled in by the Superintendent of Police, etc. concerned at the request of 
Ministry/Division/office/Federal Public Service Commission. 
 
Remarks by: 
 
Superintendent of Police 
 
 
 
Place---------- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Date----------- 
 
D.I.G. Special Branch 
 
 
 
Place---------- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Date----------- 
 
Director Intelligence Bureau 
 
 
Place---------- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Date----------- 

Page -356                                                                ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                                                CHAPTER-4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Full 
Name 
Relationship 
Age 
Nationality 
Religion 
Sect 
Occupation with 
complete details 
Whether dependent 
on you 
Residential address 
Political affiliations 
if any 
Remarks 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
(8) 
(9) 
(10) 
(11) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 
FAMILY PARTICULARS 
 
Note.- 
Full information in respect of Wife (husband in case of female employees), Father, Mother, Brothers, Sisters, Father-in-Law and Mother-in-Law should be 
furnished as under. In case of wife (or husband as the case may be) additional information in respect of her maiden name, date and place of birth, date and place of 
marriage, nationality and religion before marriage should also be furnished in remarks column. 
 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                     Page - 357 
 
 
 
2.6 
Recognition of Defence/Staff Colleges  
Qualifications as Equivalent to University  
Degree for Government Employment 
 
Where some posts were advertised by the Establishment Division in the past, the 
minimum requirement for which was a university degree, some senior officers of the armed 
forces, who wanted to apply for these posts, did not hold a university degree but they had 
qualified in various service courses e.g. National Defence College*Course, Imperial Defence 
College Course (now called Royal College of Defence Studies Course), Army War Course, 
Joint Services Staff College Course, Staff College Course etc. 
 
2.  
In view of the above position, a proposal made by the Services to the effect 
that Staff College qualifications may be recognized as equivalent to a university degree for 
government employment, was considered by the Defence Council, in its meeting held on 
11th August, 1973. The President was pleased to approve the proposal to recognize Staff 
College and other higher defence institutions qualifications given to officers of the Pakistan 
Armed Forces (Army, Navy and Air Force) as equivalent to the university degree for 
government employment. The President, however, was further pleased to direct that this 
recognition would, in no way, encourage the serving officers of the Pakistan Armed Forces 
(Army, Navy and Air Force) to apply for employment in the civil services, except for their 
rehabilitation after retirement. The above decision of the Defence Council is conveyed for 
information and guidance. 
 
[Authority:– Defence Division‘s O.M. No.111/73/D-A, dated 14-6-1974]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
* National Defence University (NDU). 

Page - 358                      ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-04                         
 
II. 
RELAXATION OF UPPER AGE LIMIT 
 
3.1 
Initial Appointment to Civil Posts (Relaxation  
of Upper Age Limit) Rules, 1993 
 
In exercise of powers conferred by sub-section (1) of section 25 of the Civil 
ServantsAct,1973 (LXXI of 1973), the President is pleased to make the following rules, 
namely :–  
PART I – GENERAL 
 
1. 
These rules may be called the Initial Appointment to Civil Posts 
(Relaxation of Upper Age Limit) Rules, 1993. 
 
 
2. 
They shall come into force with immediate effect: 
 
Provided that nothing in these rules shall apply to the appointment to the posts in 
BPS 17 to be filled through C.S.S. Competitive Examination. 
PART II – GENERAL RELAXATION 
 
3. 
Maximum age limit as prescribed in the recruitment rules shall be relaxed 
in respect of the candidates mentioned in column (2) below to the extent mentioned 
against each under column (3):– 
 
Sl. No. 
Category of candidates 
Age relaxation admissible 
(i) 
a) 
Candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes, 
Buddhist Community, recognized tribes of the 
Tribal Areas, Azad Kashmir and Gilgit 
Baltistan for all posts under the Federal 
Government. 
b) 
Candidates 
belonging 
to 
Sindh(R) 
and 
Balochistan for posts in BPS 15 and below 
under the Federal Government. 
3 years. 
 
 
 
 
3 years. 
(ii) 
Released or Retired Officers personnel of the Armed 
Forces of Pakistan. 
[15] years or the number of years 
actually served in the Armed Forces 
of Pakistan, whichever is less. 
(iii) 
Government servants who have completed 2 years 
continuous Government service on the closing date 
for receipt of applications. 
10 years, upto the age of 55 years. 
(iv) 
Disabled persons for appointment to posts in BPS 15 
and below. 
10 years 
(v)  
Widow, son or daughter of a deceased civil servant 
who dies during service 
05 years 
 
(4) 
Where a candidate is entitled to age relaxation under more than one 
categories specified in rule 3, he shall be allowed relaxation in age only in one category. 
                                                          
 Subs. vide Estt. Div.‘s Notification SRO No. 519(I)/98 dated 25-05-1998. 
 Amended vide Estt. Div.‘s Notification SRO No.576(I)/2000 dated 17-08-2000. 
 Added vide Estt. Div.‘s Notification SRO No.1055(I)/2007, dated 24-10-2007. 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                     Page - 359 
 
 
 
*[4A. (1) Subject to sub-rule (2) the maximum age limit prescribed for initial 
appointment under any rules for the time being in force shall be relaxed by a period of 
five years; 
 
(2) 
The relaxation in upper age limit shall be over and above the relaxation of age 
admissible to candidates specified in rule 3 or in any other rules for the time being in force].  
 
 **[4B. Notwithstanding the provisions contained in these rules or any other 
rules for the time being in force, the President or the Prime Minister may, on extreme 
compassionate grounds, grant age relaxation to an individual candidate for a period not 
exceeding three years over and above the relaxation in upper age limit already 
admissible, if any]. 
 
***[4C. Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, or any other rules 
for the time being in force, one-time relaxation in the upper age limit shall be admissible 
to the persons appointed to the posts, on ad-hoc basis, from the 1st October, 1981, to the 
31st December, 1995, to the extent they are overage for initial appointment to the posts, 
held by them, as and when advertised by the Federal Public Service Commission]. 
 
@ [4D. Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules or any other rules 
for the time being in force, the President or the Prime Minister@@ may grant age 
relaxation to the widow, son or daughter of a deceased civil servant who dies during 
service for such period as may be considered appropriate].    
 
@@@[4E.The relaxation in upper age limit for widow/widower of the deceased 
government servant shall be relaxed upto the age of 50 years, for appointment under the 
Prime Minister Assistant Package.]    
 
(5) 
Repeal.– All existing rules, orders and instructions relating to age relaxation 
issued from time to time are hereby repealed.  
 
[Authority:– Estt. Div.‘s Notification No. S.R.O 1079(1)/93, dated 4-11-1993]. 
3.2 
Clarification Regarding General Relaxation  
of 5 Years in Upper Age Limit Prescribed in  
Recruitment Rules 
 
 
Refer to the Establishment Division‘s O.M. No.9/2/91-R-5 dated 28th 
November,2000 on the above cited subject directing the Ministries/Divisions/ Departm-
ents that whenever vacancies are advertised by them, it should be clearly highlighted in 
the advertisement that a general relaxation of five (5) years in upper age limit SHALL 
be admissible to all the candidates and to state that the Senate Standing Committee on 
Cabinet Secretariat, Inter Provincial Coordination and Special Initiatives, in its meeting 
                                                          
* Subs. vide Estt. Div.‘s Notification  S.R.O No.586(I)/99 dated 18-05-1999. 
** Added vide Estt. Div.‘s Notification  S.R.O No.79(I)/95 dated 23-01-1995. 
*** Added vide Estt. Division Notification No. S.R.O. 798(I)/98, dated 10-7-1998. 
@ Added vide Estt. Division Notification No. S.R.O. 294(I)/2002, dated 31-5-2002. 
@@ The words ‗Chief Executive‘ subs. with the words ‗Prime Minister‘ vide Estt. Div.‘s Notification  
      SRO 1056(I)/2007, dated 24-10-2007. 
@@@ Added vide Estt. Division Notification No. S.R.O. 1004(I)/2016 dated 25-10-2016. 

Page - 360                      ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-04                         
 
held on 11-06-2010, observed that Departments, while advertising various posts had 
fixed the age limit as 25 years. The Ministries/Divisions did not mention in their 
advertisements that the candidates shall be entitled to 5 years relaxation in age over and 
above the age limit prescribed in the Recruitment Rules. The Committee took serious 
view of this on part of the Departments due to which injustice could have been caused to 
the people. 
 
2.  In light of the recommendations of the Senate Standing Committee, the 
Ministries/Divisions/Departments are advised that henceforth, the concession of 5 years 
general relaxation in upper age limit shall be clubbed with the maximum age limit of the 
post in their advertisements. In case usual upper age limit of posts in various Basic Pay 
Scales is as in column(2) below, the maximum  
age limit shall be as in column (4) below:— 
Basic Pay Scale 
Age Limit 
General 
Age Relaxation 
Maximum Age 
Limit 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
1-15 
25 years 
+ 5 years 
30 years 
16 
28 years 
+ 5 years 
33 years 
17 
30 years 
+ 5 years 
35 years 
18 
35 years 
+ 5 years 
40 years 
19 
40 years 
+ 5 years 
45 years 
20 
45 years 
+ 5 years 
50 years 
21 
50 years 
+ 5 years 
55 years 
 
 
3. 
The Ministries/Divisions are further advised that the following relaxation 
age limit available to the category of candidates specified below (to the extent mention 
each) should be clearly mentioned in their advertisements for vacant posts:— 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Category of candidates 
Age relaxation admissible 
(i) 
a) 
Candidates belonging to Scheduled 
Castes, 
Buddhist 
Community, 
recognized tribes of the Tribal Areas, 
Azad  Kashmir and Gilgit Baltistan  for 
all posts under the Federal  Government. 
b)  Candidates belonging to Sindh(R) and 
Balochistan for posts in BPS 15 and 
below under the Federal Government. 
3 years. 
 
 
 
 
3 years. 
(ii) 
Released or Retired Officers/ personnel of 
the Armed Forces of Pakistan. 
15 years or the number of 
years actually served in the 
Armed Forces of Pakistan, 
whichever is less. 
(iii) 
Government 
servants 
and 
contract 
employees who have completed 2 years 
continuous Government service on the 
10 years, upto the age of 55 
years. 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                     Page - 361 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Category of candidates 
Age relaxation admissible 
closing date for receipt of applications. 
(iv)
 
 
Disabled persons for appointment to posts 
in BPS 15 and below. 
10 years 
(v)  
Widow, son or daughter of a deceased civil 
servant who dies during service 
05 years 
Note: Where a candidate is entitled to age relaxation under more than one categories 
specified above, he shall be allowed relaxation in age only in one category. 
 
 
 
4. 
In addition to above, the President/Prime Minister may, on extreme 
compassionate grounds, grant age relaxation to an individual candidate for a period not 
exceeding three years. 
 
5. 
Further, where the Ministries/Divisions/Departments have recently 
advertised various posts and the candidates have appeared in written test but their interviews 
are yet to be held i.e. their selection process is not over, the said posts may be re-advertised 
for additional applications with clear rule position about age limit and age relaxations as at 
paras 2 and 3 above.  
 
6. 
It may be added that the upper age limit relaxations mentioned at paras 2 and 
3 above have been provided in the Initial Appointment to Civil Posts (Relaxation of Upper 
age Limit) Rules,1993 which are not applicable for recruitment to posts to be filled through 
Annual Competitive (CSS) Examination conducted by the FPSC. 
 
7. 
For recruitment to BS-17 posts to be filled through the Annual Competitive 
(CSS) Examination, the upper age limit is presently 28 years which is relaxable by 2 years 
for Government Servants, Armed Forces Personnel and other specified categories of 
candidates. 
 
8.    The Ministries/Divisions are requested to strictly observe the above 
mentioned instructions and also bring the same to the notice of the Departments/ 
Organizations under their administrative control for strict compliance.   
[Authority:- Establishment Division‘s O.M No.9/2/91-R-5 dated 24-06-2010.] 
3.3 
Relaxation in Upper Age Limit to Persons Employed  
in Government Department on Contract Basis 
 
Sub rule (iii) of rule 3 of Initial Appointment to Civil Posts (Relaxation of 
Upper Age Limit) Rules, 1993, notified vide SRO 1079(I)/93 dated 4th November, 1993 
provides *[15] years relaxation upto 55 years in the upper age limit prescribed in the 
recruitment rules for Government Servants who have completed 02 years continuous 
government service on the closing date for receipt of applications. 
 
2. 
A question has arisen whether the above mentioned relaxation in upper 
age limit is also available to those persons who are employed on contract basis in 
government departments? The matter has been examined and it is clarified that the above 
mentioned relaxation in upper age limit is admissible to ―government servants‖. The 
                                                          
*Substituted vide Establishment Division‘s Notification SRO No. 576(1)/2000, dated 17.8.2000. 

Page - 362                      ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-04                         
 
persons employed in a government department, (as distinct from a body corporate 
established by or under an Act of Parliament) on contract basis are ―government 
servants,‖ and are eligible for and entitled to relaxation in upper age limit under sub rule 
(iii) of rule 3 of the Initial Appointment to Civil Posts (Relaxation of Upper Age Limit) 
Rules, 1993, subject to fulfilling the other conditions laid down in the said rules. 
[Authority.– Establishment Division‘s O.M.No.9/2/90-R.5, dated 11-9-2000]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                     Page - 363 
 
 
III. CONTRACT APPOINTMENTS 
 
4.1 
Appointment on Contract Basis 
 
The standard terms and conditions of appointment on contract were last 
circulated vide Establishment Division's O.M.No. F.10/55/82-R.2, dated 15th January, 
1985. These have since been reviewed in consultation with Finance Division and Law 
and Justice Division. 
 
2. 
All Ministries/Divisions are requested that, henceforth, the Revised 
Format (Annex-I) may be used in case of contract appointments in the Ministries, 
Divisions and their Attached Departments and other Organisations under them. 
[Authority.– Establishment Division‘s O.M.No.F.10/52/95-R.2,dated 18-7-1996]. 
 
Annex-I 
 
Revised Format 
 
GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN 
Name of Ministry_______ 
 
No………………. 
                                    Islamabad/Rawalpindi      ,20…....  
 
From: ……….. 
 
To: ……. 
 
Subject: EMPLOYMENT ON CONTRACT BASIS 
 
Sir, 
 
 
I am directed to say that you have been selected for appointment on contract as 
...............……... under the Federal Government on the following terms and conditions:–  
 1.   Post: 
....................... 
 2.   Place of posting: 
.........or anywhere within or outside Pakistan as the 
competent authority may decide. 
 3.   Period of contract: 
........ (not exceeding two years) from the date of 
assumption of charge. 
 4.   Pay: 
Minimum of the relevant scale of pay. Annual increment 
shall be admissible as under the normal rules. 
 5.   Allowances: 
As admissible to corresponding civil servants. However, 
Qualifications Pay/ Allowance, Senior Post Allowance and 
Orderly Allowance shall not be admissible in case these 
allowances were taken into account while calculating pension 
after retirement from previous service. 

Page - 364                      ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-04                         
 
 6.   Traveling  
      Allowance: 
As admissible to civil servants of the corresponding pay scale 
under the rules. 
 7.   Seniority:  
This contract appointment does not confer any right for being 
placed in the gradation/ seniority list of the cadre/group to 
which the subject post belongs. 
 8.   Leave: 
As admissible under the Revised Leave Rules, 1980. 
However, provisions contained in Rules 5(c), 8, 11, 14, 
16,17, 18, 18-A, 19, 27, 33, 34, 35, 36 and 39 of Rules ibid 
shall not apply. 
 
 
All leave at your credit will lapse on the termination of this 
contract. 
9.  Medical Facilities: 
As admissible to officers of the Federal Government under 
the rules. 
10.  Pension:  
Service rendered under this contract shall not qualify for a 
pension or gratuity. 
 
 
Pension in respect of previous service, if any, shall 
continue to be drawn in addition to pay. 
 
11.  General Provident 
       Fund: 
No contribution towards G.P Fund shall be required. 
12.  Conduct and  
       Discipline: 
Rules made and instructions issued by the Government or a 
prescribed authority as for civil servants under Section 15 
and 16 of the Civil Servants Act, 1973 as amended from 
time to time shall apply. 
13.  Appeal: 
Civil Servants (Appeal) Rules 1977 with amendments if 
any shall apply. 
14.  Termination of  
        contract: 
The appointment during the period of contract shall be 
liable to termination on 30 days notice on either side or 
payment of basic pay in lieu thereof, without  assigning 
any reason. 
15.  Whole Time  
       employment  
       posting and  
       transfer: 
Whole time of the contract appointee would be at the 
disposal of the Government. He may be employed in any 
manner required by appropriate authority without claim for 
additional remuneration. He shall at all times obey the 
rules prescribed for the time being for the regulation of the 
service or cadre to which the post in which he has been 
employed belongs. 
16.  Other matters: 
In respect of other matters not specified in this contract, the 
rules/regulations as applicable to federal civil servants 
shall apply. 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                     Page - 365 
 
 
* [17. Accommodation 
(i) Persons appointed on contract to civil posts relating to 
the affairs of the Federation, may be provided the same 
facility of government owned or hired residence as is 
admissible to persons of corresponding grade in the 
civil service. 
 
(ii) Autonomous/semi-autonomous bodies/ corporations 
under the Federal Government may also be advised to 
follow 
the 
aforesaid 
policy 
subject 
to 
such 
modification as may be permissible under their 
prescribed service regulations.] 
 
2. 
 If the above terms and conditions of appointment are acceptable to you, 
please send your written confirmation by registered post or personally so as to reach the 
undersigned within one month of the date of this letter. 
 
3.  
This offer of appointment will be treated as cancelled if you do not convey 
acceptance thereof or resume duty within the time specified in para 2 above. 
Your obedient servant 
 
4.2 
Guidelines for Appointment  
on Contract Basis 
 
It has been noticed with concern that contract appointments were made in the past 
indiscriminately without proper examination of the need therefor and without ensuring 
observance of the principle of open merit, and equality of opportunity. It has now been 
decided by the Chief Executive that the following guidelines should be strictly observed in 
future while proposing contract appointments to civil posts under the Federal Government:–  
(i) 
The department concerned should specifically justify why it is not possible 
to fill in a vacancy in accordance with the procedure laid down in the Civil 
Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973 and the 
recruitment rules and where it is considered necessary to fill in a post on 
contract, it shall only be for a period not exceeding two years. The 
professional qualifications, experience, and age limit (where necessary) 
required for the post, shall be prescribed in consultation with the 
Establishment Division. 
(ii) 
The decision to fill the vacant post on contract basis shall be taken at the 
level of the Secretary of the Ministry/Division and/or head of the 
departments/ organizations etc. 
The post should be advertised and selection made by a Departmental Selection 
Committee as per following composition:– 
 
                                                          
*Amended vide Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.10/52/95-R.2 dated 25-06-2001. 
 

Page - 366                      ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-04                         
 
Basic Pay Scales Composition of the Selection Committee 
 
 BPS 20 and above 
Minister  
- 
Chairman 
 
 
 
 
 
Secretary 
- 
Member 
 
 
 
 
 
J.S (Admn) 
- 
Member-cum-Secy. 
 
Note.– In case the post(s) is/are in an Attached 
Department/Subordinate 
Office, 
Head 
of 
the 
Department will be co-opted as member. 
 
       BPS 1 to 19 
 Selection 
should 
be 
made 
by 
the 
Selection 
Committees/Boards which have been constituted for 
regular appointments in BPS 19 and below. 
(iii)   (a)  
The condition of open advertisement may be dispensed with, with the 
approval of the Chief Executive**, if it is proposed to appoint a retired 
civil servant or a retired officer of the armed forces or a retired judge of a 
superior court, on contract basis. 
   
 (b)   
The condition of open advertisement may be relaxed by the **Chief 
Executive for the purpose of appointment on contract basis of widow, or 
one child of a deceased civil servant who dies during service provided 
that such special dispensation may be allowed only for appointment to 
posts in BS-10 and below. 
 
(c)  
@[The condition of open advertisement may also be relaxed by the Prime 
Minister for the purpose of appointment on contract basis of 
widow/widower or one child of a deceased civil servant who dies during 
service and wife/husband or one child of a serving civil servant who 
becomes ―permanently disabled during service‖ and he/she takes 
retirement from service provided that such special dispensation may be 
allowed only for appointment to posts in BPS 10 and below @@[the 
widow/widower or a child of a civil servant who dies during service may 
be entitled to apply for contract appointment as per maximum age limit 
prescribed for Initial Appointment to Civil Posts (Relaxation of  Upper 
Age Limit) Rules,1993].  
 
 
 
 
Provided further that the widow/widower or a child of a civil 
servant who dies during service and wife/husband or a child of a serving 
civil servant who becomes ―permanently disabled during service‖ and 
he/she takes retirement from service will have to apply for contract 
appointment within one year after the death of a civil servant or 
retirement of a permanently disabled civil servant. In case of a minor 
                                                          
 Added vide Estt. Div.‘s corrigendum F.No.8/10/2000-CP.I, dated 02-03-2000 and O.M.No.810/2000-CP.I 
dated 12-08-2005. 
**Prime Minister. 
  Subs. vide Establishment Division‘s O.M. No. F. 8/10/2000-CP.I dated 05-01-2002. 
 @ Subs. vide Establishment Division‘s O.M.No.4/1/2005-CP.I, dated 13.4.2005. 
@@ Amended vide Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 8/12/2016-E-2 dated 17-04-2018. 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                     Page - 367 
 
 
child of a civil servant, the one year period will start from the date he/she 
attains the age of 18 years].  
      (iv) 
 
All contract appointments shall be made with the approval of the 
appointing authority prescribed under the Civil Servants (Appointment, 
Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973. 
(v) 
As a matter of general policy, the period of contract shall not be extended 
beyond two years but in exceptional cases where it is considered 
necessary to extend such appointments beyond the period of two years, 
the advice/concurrence of the FPSC may be sought at least six months in 
advance of expiry of the period of original appointment, and thereafter 
approval of the competent authority may be sought. It is clarified that the 
requirement of seeking advice/concurrence of FPSC is applicable only in 
respect of posts which fall under the purview of FPSC in accordance with 
rule 3 of FPSC (Functions) Rules, 1978. 
 
2. 
Policy guidelines for contract appointments in Autonomous Bodies/ Semi- 
Autonomous Bodies, Corporations, Public Sector Companies etc. owned and managed by 
the Federal Government shall be issued separately. 
 
3. 
The Chief Executive may allow contract appointment of a retired civil 
servant or a retired officer of the armed forces or a retired judge of a superior court or any 
other person on MP pay package in the public interest and merit.  
[Authority:– O.M. No.8/10/2000-CP.I, dated 21-3-2000 as amended from time to time]. 
4.3 
Policy Guidelines for Contract Appointments for 
Posts in Autonomous/ Semi-Autonomous Bodies, Corporations, 
Public Sector Companies etc. Owned 
and Managed by the Federal Government 
 
 In order to regulate contract appointments in autonomous/semi-autonomous 
bodies, corporations, public sector companies etc., owned and managed by the Federal 
Government, the *Chief Executive has been pleased to lay down the following policy 
guidelines:– 
(i) 
In the case of tenure posts, appointment to which is regulated by specific 
provisions of a law, rule and policy instructions, contract appointments 
may be made in the manner prescribed in the applicable law, rules and 
policy guidelines/directions issued by the Federal Government. 
(ii) 
For projects which have a limited life, appointments may be made on 
contract basis by the prescribed appointing authority after open advertise-
ment of the vacancies. The advertisement should indicate prescribed 
academic and professional qualifications, experience, age, provincial/ 
regional quotas, special quotas etc. where applicable, as per rules/ 
government policy. 
                                                          
 Now Prime Minister. 

Page - 368                      ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-04                         
 
(iii) For posts other than those mentioned at (i) and (ii) above, contract 
appointments should be made only subject to fulfillment and observance 
of the following conditions: 
(a) 
Where the nature of a particular job/vacant position requires 
contract appointment for a specific period, standing instructions should 
be issued by the administrative Ministry/ Division concerned, after 
consultation with the Chairman of the Board of Directors/ Board of 
Governors, specifying such posts and the parameters governing 
appointment on contract basis against such posts. 
(b) 
Vacancies should be advertised in the leading national and regional 
newspapers. 
(c) 
Selection should be made through regularly constituted Selection 
Committees/Boards. 
(iv) In the case of contract appointments/re-employment of retired civil 
servants, retired armed forces officers and retired judges of superior 
courts, the condition of open advertisement shall not be applicable, 
provided that such appointments shall be made by or with the prior 
approval of the prescribed authorities in the Federal Government. 
[(v) The contract appointment, where justified, may be made for a period of 
two years initially, on standard terms including termination clause of one 
month‘s notice or one month‘s pay in lieu thereof. Extension may be 
made on two yearly basis]. 
 
2. 
Ministries/Divisions are requested to circulate the above policy guidelines 
to all Autonomous/Semi-Autonomous Bodies, Corporations, Public Sector Companies 
etc., owned and managed by the Federal Government for strict compliance. 
[Authority.– Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No.6/2/2000-R.3, dated 6-5-2000]. 
4.4 
Protection of Pay of Contract Employees on 
Regularization/ Appointment on Regular Basis  
 
The proposals for protection of pay last drawn by the contract employees on their 
regularization/appointment on regular basis are received in Finance Division and 
considered/decided on case to case basis. The existing rules/orders on the subject do not 
provide for protection of pay of contract employees on their regularization. The Courts 
have held from time to time that the pay of contract employees on their 
regularization/appointment on regular basis should be protected. The matter has been 
examined in the light of Court‘s Judgments and it has been decided to issue general policy 
guidelines in this regard. Pay of a non-Gazetted contract employee on his 
regularization/appointment on regular basis will be protected subject to the following 
conditions:- 
                                                          
 Subs. vide Establishment Division‘s O.M.No.6/2/2000-R.3, dated 29-4-2002. 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                     Page - 369 
 
 
i) 
That the contract appointment has been made on standard terms and 
conditions circulated by Establishment Division as amended for time to 
time.  
ii) 
That the contract employee has applied through proper channel and has 
been properly relieved by the appointing authority. This condition shall not 
apply in case of regularization on the same post.  
iii) 
That regularization/regular appointment has been made with the approval of 
competent authority.  
iv) 
That there is no break/interruption between contract service and regular 
service.  
v) 
That the service rendered on contract basis shall not qualify for 
pension/gratuity. 
vi) 
That in case of regular appointment in lower grade pay shall not be 
protected. 
 
2. 
Ministries/Divisions/Departments are authorized to protect/ fix pay in terms 
of above guidelines. Only those cases may be referred to Finance Division where some 
clarification or advice of Finance Division is required.  
[Authority:- Finance Division‘s O.M.No.7(9)R-I/2012 dated 31-05-2013] 
4.5 
Extension in the Period of Contract  
Appointments for Posts Outside the  
Purview of FPSC 
 
The guidelines for contract appointments issued vide Establishment Division 
O.M.No.8/10/2000-CP.I, dated 21-3-2000 lay down inter alia, that:– 
(v)  ―As a matter of general policy the period of contract shall not be extended 
beyond two years but in exceptional cases where it is considered necessary 
to extend such appointments beyond the period of two years, the 
advice/concurrence of the FPSC may be sought at least six months in 
advance of expiry of the period of original appointment, and thereafter 
approval of the competent authority may be sought‖. It is clarified that the 
requirement of seeking advice/concurrence of FPSC is applicable only in 
respect of posts which fall under the purview of FPSC in accordance with 
rule 3 of FPSC (Functions) Rules, 1978‖. 
 
2. 
The above caveat is only applicable to such posts which fall within the 
purview of the FPSC in terms of rule 3 of the FPSC (Functions) Rules, 1978 i.e. posts in 
BPS 16 and above and posts in BPS 11 to 15 in the departments specified vide SRO 
No.415/2000 dated 19.6.2000. 
 
3. 
In terms of sub para (iv) of para 1 of above said O.M dated 21-03-2000 
contract appointments are required to be made with the approval of the appointing authority 
prescribed under rule 6 of the Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 
1973. This means that contract appointment to posts in BPS 20 and above are required to be 

Page - 370                      ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-04                         
 
approved by the Chief Executive*, and extension of such appointments beyond two years 
would also require the approval of the Chief Executive*. 
 
4. 
As regards appointments beyond two years to posts in BPS 19 and below 
falling outside the purview of the FPSC following instructions may be followed:– 
(i) 
extension of contract appointments beyond two years to posts in BPS 17 to 19 
shall be subject to the approval of the Establishment Secretary; 
(ii) 
extension of contract appointments beyond two years to posts in BPS 16 shall 
be subject to approval of the Secretary of the administrative Division concerned 
and heads of departments in BPS 21; 
(iii) extension of contract appointments beyond two years to posts in BPS 15 and 
below shall be subject to approval of a BPS 21 officers designated by 
Secretary in the case of Ministries/ Divisions and Head of Department in the 
case of Attached Departments and subordinate offices; 
(iv) the case for extension shall be moved at least two months in advance of the 
expiry of original appointment. 
[Authority: Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No.8/10/2000-CP.I, dated 23-12-2000]. 
 
4.6 
Standard Terms and Conditions of Contract Appointments – Case of 
Retired Civil Servants, Retired Officers of the Armed Forces, Retired 
Judges of Superior Courts 
 
Reference Standard Terms and Conditions of Contract Employment, issued vide 
Establishment Division‘s O.M.No.10/52/95-R.2, dated 18.7.1996, as amended from time 
to time, the matter has been reviewed in consultation with the Finance Division, and it 
has been decided with the approval of the competent authority that the terms of re-
employment of retired civil servants, retired officers of the armed forces and retired 
judges of superior courts shall henceforth be as under:– 
I. 
Re-employment on a civil post relating to the affairs of the Federal 
Government: 
(a) 
A retired civil servant and a retired officer of the armed forces, re-
employed on a civil post equivalent to the post from which he retired, 
may be allowed the pay, allowances and perquisites sanctioned for the 
post. His pay may be fixed at that stage of the time scale of the post at 
which he was drawing his pay before retirement. 
(b) 
A retired judge of the superior courts may be allowed pay, allowances and 
perquisites sanctioned for the post, and his pay may be fixed at the 
maximum of the pay scale of the post. 
*(c) A retired civil servant or a retired officer of the armed forces, re-
employed against a higher post, may be allowed the last pay drawn plus 
allowances and perquisites sanctioned for the post. 
                                                          
* Prime Minister. 
* Subs. vide Estab. Div.‘s OM No. 10.52/95-R-2(pt) dated 6th October 2003. 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                     Page - 371 
 
 
II. Re-employment in Autonomous Bodies: 
(a) 
A retired civil servant and a retired officer of the armed forces and a 
retired judge of the superior courts, on  re-employment in an autonomous 
body administered or controlled by the Federal Government, may be 
allowed pay as determined at (a), (b) and (c) above plus the allowances 
and perquisites sanctioned for the post. 
(b) 
Where the terms and conditions of a post are prescribed in a statute or a 
statutory notification, the provisions of the statute or the statutory 
notification, as the case may be, should prevail. 
III. Existing Pensionary benefits to continue. 
The terms and conditions proposed above should have no bearing on the 
pension to which a retired civil servant or a retired officer of the armed forces 
or a retired judge of the superior courts may be entitled in accordance with the 
applicable law and the rules. 
 
2. 
The standard terms and conditions of contract appointment circulated vide 
O.M.No.F.10/52/95-R.2, dated 18-7-1996 stand amended to the above extent.  
[Authority.– Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No.10/52/95-R.2(Pt), dated 21-8-2001]. 
4.7 
Standard Terms and Conditions of Contract Appointments – Case 
of Retired Civil Servants, Retired Officers of the Armed Forces, 
Retired Judges of Superior Courts  
 
Reference the instructions contained in Establishment Division‘s O.M. No. 
I0/52/95-R-2 (Pt), dated 21st August, 2001 as amended vide O.M. No. I0/52/95-R-2 (Pt) 
dated 6th October, 2003 on the above subject. A question has arisen whether on re-
employment on contract, annual increment is admissible or otherwise. The matter has 
been considered in consultation with the Finance Division and it has been decided that 
annual increment shall be admissible as under the normal rules. 
[Authority: Estab. Div.‘s OM No. 10/17/2007-R-2, dated 19th July, 2007] 
4.8 
Standard Terms and Conditions of Contract Appointment-Case of 
Retired Civil Servants, Retired Officers of the Armed Forces, 
Retired Judges of Superior Courts 
Reference Establishment Division's O.M No. 10/52/95-R-2, dated 21-8-2001 as 
amended vide O.M of same number dated 6-10-2003 laying down the criteria for fixation 
of pay of retired civil servants, retired officers of the armed forces and retired judges of 
the superior courts re-employed on contract against equivalent or higher posts. It is to 
clarify that the instructions contained in Establishment Division‘s O.M referred to above 
are applicable to all retired civil servants and retired employees of armed forces re-
employed on contract against equivalent or higher post on standard terms and conditions. 
However, there is no such provision regarding fixation of pay of such officers re-
employed on contract against a lower post. In such like cases persons re-employed on 

Page - 372                      ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-04                         
 
contract against a lower post are entitled to the pay of the post against which their re-
employment has been made. 
[Authority: Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No. 10/7/2005-R.2, dated 12th January, 2008] 
 
4.9 
Clarification on Protection of Pay of Gazetted  
Contract Employees on Regularization/Appointment 
on Regular Basis  
 
Refer to this Division‘s O.M of even number dated 07-04-2015 on the subject 
noted above.  
2. 
The clarifications to the queries raised by Ministries / Divisions/ Departments and 
AGPR, Islamabad are conveyed as under. 
S. No. 
QUERIES RAISED 
CLARIFICATION 
1 
Finance Division‘s OM dated 07-04-21015 
does 
not 
contain 
effective 
date 
of 
implementation from which date will it take 
effect. 
The said O.M will take 
effect from the date of its 
issuance i.e. 07-04-2015. 
2 
Whether the officer regularized from contract 
service prior to issuance of the said OM i.e. 
07-04-2015 will also be entitled for protection 
of pay or otherwise.  
Yes However, no arrears are 
admissible prior to 07-04-
2015 
3 
Whether the officer whose services were 
regularized from development side to non-
development 
side 
on 
regular 
basis 
(development post to regular post) are entitled 
to pay protection.  
Pay is protectable for those 
employees 
only 
whose 
contract appoint-ment  on 
development side, was made 
in BPS on standard terms 
and conditions issued by 
Establishment Division. 
4 
Whether arrears/back benefits to those 
employees are admissible whose service were 
regularized prior to the issuance of the said 
O.M on 07-04-2015.  
No arrears/back benefits are 
admissible 
prior 
to 
the 
issuance of the said O.M on 
07-04-2015.  
5 
Whether the concurrence of FPSC is required 
for all the cases of contract appointment/re-
appointment beyond 02 years against civil 
post in BS-16 to BS-22 made or continue after 
25-03-2010. 
Being 
an 
administrative 
nature of issue, relates to 
Establishment 
Division/ 
FPSC.  
  
[Authority:– Finance Div.‘s O.M. No.4(2)R-2/2014-241, dated 20-09-2016]. 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                     Page - 373 
 
 
IV. CURRENT/ADDITIONAL CHARGE AND ACTING CHARGE 
APPOINTMENTS 
 
5.1 
Current/Additional Charge and  
Acting Charge Appointments 
 
According to the existing instructions all appointments by promotion in higher 
posts are to be made through regular selection process i.e. with the approval of the 
Central Selection Board/ Departmental Promotion Committee and the authority 
competent to make appointment to the BPS in which the vacancy exists. However, in those 
cases where a vacancy in a higher post occurs for less than two months and it is considered 
impossible for good reasons to make arrangements for day to day work of that post to be carried 
on otherwise, the current charge of the duties of that post may be given temporarily, with the 
approval of the authority competent to make appointments to the said post, to the most senior 
officer in the cadre present at the place or in the organization where the vacancy may have 
occurred if he is otherwise fit and eligible for promotion. 
 
2.  
Situations arise in various departments where higher posts have to be filled 
urgently for short periods independently of the normal promotion and appointment 
procedure which takes time. The matter has been considered in consultation with the 
Ministry of Finance.  In order to overcome the difficulty, the President has been pleased to 
delegate the power to make current charge appointments as follows:- 
 
(i) 
Secretaries/Additional     
 
 
Secretaries............    
 
(ii) 
Heads of Attached Department 
 
 
not below BPS 21 including  
 
 
Chairman, FPSC and Chairman 
 
 
For BPS 
 
 
Federal Inspection Commission  
 
 
17 to 20 
 
 
in respect of their own  
 
 
officers................. 
 
(iii) Auditor General of Pakistan  
 
 
Pakistan Audit Department..   
 
 
 
  
 
(iv) Military Accountant  
 
 
General for Military   
 
 
 
Upto BPS 20 
 
 
Accounts Departments...... 
 
 
 
 (v) Member Finance, Railway Board for 
 
 
Railway Audit Department................ 
 
(vi) Head of Department as defined in 
 
 
For BPS 
 
 
S.R.2(10) not below BPS-20......... 
 
 
17 and 18 
 
3. 
The exercise of the powers as delegated shall be subject to the observance of 
the following conditions:— 
                                                          
 or Selection Board for posts in BPS 19. 

Page - 374                      ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-04                         
 
 
(i)    the arrangement should not be made for a period of less than one month and 
should not exceed three months;  however, it may be extended by another 
three months with the approval of the next higher authority; 
 
(ii)   as soon as the current charge is given, a proposal for regular appointment 
should be initiated and referred to DPC/CSB within a month; and 
 
(iii)  in making current charge arrangement, the senior most officer available in 
the organization and present at the place where the vacancy may have 
occurred, if he is otherwise fit and eligible for promotion, should be 
considered. 
 
4. 
 An officer appointed to hold current charge of a higher post shall be 
allowed, in term of F.R. 35 and proviso to Section 17 of the Civil Servants Act, 1973 pay in 
his own grade plus additional pay equal to 20% of his grade pay ***(In case of 
Additional Charge of Identical post 20% of the Basic Pay subject to maximum Rs.12,000/- 
and in case of Additional Charge of Non-Identical post 10% of the Basic Pay subject to 
maximum Rs.12,000/- w.e.f 01-07-2016. 
 
5.  
The existing orders on the subject are modified to the above extent. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.1/21/76-AR.I/R-II, dated 18-6-1980, as amended vide O.M. of 
even number dated 10-4-1981]. 
 
5.2 
Clarification Regarding Length of  
Service for Current Charge 
 
With 
reference 
to 
the 
Establishment 
Division's 
Office 
Memorandum  
No.1/21/76- AR.I/R.II dated the 18th June 1980 it is clarified that for the purpose of 
making current charge arrangements, it is not necessary to insist on completion of the 
length of service as prescribed for promotion. 
 [Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 1/4/84-R.2 dated 3-7-1984]. 
5.3 
Enhancement of Special Pay Admissible  to an Officer  
Appointed to Hold Current Charge of a Higher Post 
 
Under the existing orders, an officer appointed to hold current charge of a higher 
post in addition to the duties of his own post, is allowed in terms of F.R. 35 and proviso to 
section 17 of Civil Servants Act, 1973, pay of his own post plus special pay equal to 10% of 
his pay. The position has been reviewed and in order to afford sufficient compensation to a 
person performing duties of higher post carrying higher responsibilities, it has been decided, 
with the approval of the competent authority, that in case of current charge appointments to 
higher posts, special pay shall be admissible at the rate of 20% of pay subject to a maximum 
of ***[Rs.12,000/- p.m. with effect from 1-7-2016]. 
 
2. 
However, it is emphasized that the current charge arrangements should be 
made with the approval of the competent authority strictly in accordance with the orders 
contained in the Establishment Division's O.M.No.1/21/76-A.R.I/R.II, dated 18-6-1980. 
 [Authority:– Finance Division‘s O.M. No. F.2(9)-R.3/85, dated 15-3-1987]. 
                                                          
 or Selection Board for posts in BPS 19. 
 BPS. 
 Revised & added vide Finance Division O.M. No. F.1(2)/Imp/2016-333, dated 01-07-2016. 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                     Page - 375 
 
 
5.4 
Current Charge Appointment – Determination  
of Seniority Within an Organization 
 
Reference Establishment Division's O.M. No. 1/21/76- AR.I/R.II, dated 18th June, 
1980 which provides that ―the current charge of the duties of that post may be given 
temporarily, with the approval of the authority competent to make appointment to the said 
post, to the most senior officer in the cadre present at the place or in the organisation where 
the vacancy may have occurred if he is otherwise fit and eligible for promotion‖. Queries 
have been received as to the definition of the word ―place‖ and ―organization‖. 
 
2.  
The matter has been considered.  The word ―place‖ refers to the area in 
which the office in which the vacancy has arisen is located, e.g., Rawalpindi, Islamabad, 
Karachi etc. The word ―organization‖ refers to each distinctive administrative unit of 
department.  For instance in a Division which is divided into different Wings each as a 
distinct entity, the organization will refer to each such Wing. 
 [Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 1/21/76-AR-I/R.II, dated 14-3-1981]. 
 
5.5 
Extension in Current Charge Appointment 
 
With reference to the Establishment Division O.M. No. 1/21/76-AR.I/R.II, dated 
the 18th June, 1980 as amended vide Establishment Division O.M. of 10th April, 1981 a 
question has been raised as to which authority is competent to extend current charge 
appointment beyond 6 months. 
 
2.  
The delegation made vide the Establishment Division O.M. No. 
1/21/76- AR.I/R.II, dated the 18th June, 1980 as amended vide O.M. dated 10th April, 
1981 is in partial modification of the Establishment Division O.M. No. 7/22/70-AVII, 
dated 7th  August, 1970.  The cases of extension of current charge appointment beyond 6 
months will, therefore, continue to be sanctioned by the Establishment Secretary in respect of 
posts in BPS 17 to 19 and by the President in respect of posts in  BPS 20 and above. 
 
3. 
The current charge arrangement is made as a temporary measure pending 
appointment of a person to the post on a regular basis.  It is expected that the case for regular 
appointment will be simultaneously initiated and finalised within the period of 6 months 
which is considered sufficient for the purpose. Normally, therefore, there should be no 
occasion for extending current charge arrangement beyond 6 months. In those cases only 
where it is necessary to continue the current charge arrangement beyond this period cases, 
should be referred to the Establishment Division.  Such cases should indeed the rare.  The 
case should be referred in the form of a summary for the President in the case of posts in 
BPS 20 and above and for Establishment Secretary in the case of posts in BPS 17 to 19, 
stating what action was taken to fill the post on a regular basis, the reasons why it has not 
been possible to make a regular appointment within the prescribed period of 6 months and 
full justification for further extension of temporary arrangement.  The period for further 
extension should be as short as possible necessary to make regular arrangements. 
                                                          
 Now the Prime Minister for posts in BPS 20 and Secretary of the Ministry/Division concerned for  posts 
in 
 
BPS 17 to 19.  
 Prime Minister. 

Page - 376                      ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-04                         
 
 
4. 
The proposal to continue payment of additional pay beyond 6 months will 
also require approval from the Ministry of Finance. The proposals may therefore be referred 
initially to the Ministry of Finance for their concurrence before referring the case to the 
Establishment Division. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M. No 1/21/76-AR-I/R-II dated 6-4-1987]. 
 
5.6 
Grant of Current Charge of the Post of Section Officer to 
Superintendents/Assistants in Ministries/Divisions 
 
Refer to the Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 6/2/90- OMG.II dated 16th 
May,1990 on the above subject and to state that references have been received in the 
Establishment Division enquiring whether the current charge of the post of Section Officer 
can be granted to Stenographer (BPS-15)/Stenotypist (BPS-12) also.  
 
2. 
The matter has been considered, it is accordingly advised that the current 
charge of the post of Section Officer in the Ministries/Divisions shall be given only to the 
Superintendents (BPS-16/17). Alternatively, additional charge may be given to another 
Section Officer, by the Ministries/Divisions.  
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M. No 1/19/96-R-II dated 30-01-1997]. 
 
5.7 
Correct Designation of Officers Holding  
Current Charge of Higher Posts 
 
It has been decided in consultation with the Law Division that an officer holding a 
higher post on current charge basis may use the designation of that post in relation to a duty 
attached to that post. 
[Authority:–  Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 1/3/82-R.2, dated 16-12-1982]. 
5.8 
Appointment of Officers on Current Charge Against Higher Posts 
and Payment of Additional Remuneration Therefor 
 
Reference instructions contained in para 3 of Establishment Division O.M. No. 
1/21/76-AR-I/R -II dated 6-4-1987 which provide that the extension of current charge 
arrangement should be sought from the *President and the Establishment Secretary in 
case of posts in BPS 20 and above and posts in BPS 17-19, respectively. It is stated the 
aforesaid instructions have been reviewed in consequence of amendment in rule 6 of the 
Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion & Transfer) Rules 1973 notified vide SRO 
No.276(1)/2000 dated 25.5.2000 under which Secretaries of the Ministries/ Divisions 
have been authorized to make appointments to posts in BPS 17 to 19, and it is clarified 
that extension of current charge arrangement to posts in BPS 17 and above is now 
required to be sought from the appointing authority prescribed in rule 6 of the Civil 
Servants (Appointment, Promotion & Transfer) Rules, 1973. 
 
2. 
While approving/extending current charge arrangements, the following 
guidelines are required to be strictly observed:- 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                     Page - 377 
 
 
(i) 
Current charge arrangement is a temporary measure pending appointment 
of a person on regular basis in the prescribed manner. 
(ii) 
Proposal for regular appointment in the prescribed manner should be 
initiated at the earliest opportunity and current charge arrangement should 
not be considered as a justification for delay in filling the posts on regular 
basis in the prescribed manner. 
(iii) Six months is considered a sufficiently long period for the purpose of 
filling of posts on regular basis and, therefore, there should, normally, be 
no occasion or necessity, for seeking extension of current charge 
arrangement beyond six months. 
(iv) Extension of current charge beyond six months requires prior consultation 
with the Finance Division before seeking the orders of the competent 
appointing authority prescribed in rule 6 of the Civil Servants 
(Appointment, Promotion & Transfer) Rules, 1973. 
(v) 
Current charge of a higher post can be given only to those persons who 
fulfill eligibility conditions for regular promotion to that higher post. 
(vi) Normally the most senior persons available in the Wing/Unit where 
higher post falls vacant should be given current charge or higher post. 
 
3. 
While issuing formal sanction for grant of additional remuneration on 
account of current charge, it may be specifically certified that the above mentioned guidelines 
have been kept in view while approving/extending current charge arrangement. 
[Authority: Estab. Div.‘s OM No. 1/17/2000-R-2, dated 21st Nov., 2000] 
 
5.9 
Guidelines for Appointment of Officers on Current  
Charge Against Higher Post and Payment of Additional 
Remuneration Therefor 
The administrative instructions regarding current charge appointments 
contained in Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 1/21/76-AR-I/R-II dated 18-06-1980 
read with O.M No. 1/21/76-AR-I/R-II dated 06-04-1982 read with O.M No. 1/17/2000-
R-II dated 21-11-2000 on the subject provide that all appointments by promotion in 
higher posts are required to be made through regular selection process i.e. with the 
approval of CSB/DPC and the Authority competent to make appointment to the grades in 
which the vacancy exists. However, in those cases where a vacancy in higher posts 
occurs for less than two months and it is considered impossible for good reasons to make 
arrangements for day to day work of that post to be carried on otherwise, the duties of 
that post may be given temporarily with the approval of Authority competent to make 
appointments to the said posts, to the senior most officer in the cadre present at the place 
or in the organization where the vacancy may have occurred, if he is otherwise fit and 
eligible for promotion. In order to overcome the difficulties, authorities competent to 
approve such arrangements from BS-17 to BS-20 have also been prescribed. The above 
referred instructions also provide that the said arrangements should not be made for a 
period of less than one month and should not exceed three months. However, the 
arrangements can be extended with the approval of the Appointing Authority for another 

Page - 378                      ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-04                         
 
period of three months. Extension beyond six months requires prior consultation with the 
Finance Division before seeking orders of the competent authority prescribed in rule 6 of 
the Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion & Transfer) Rules, 1973. 
2. 
It has been observed that the said instructions are not being compiled 
with in letter and spirit and the current charge arrangements are extended with a gap of 
couple of days for one reason or the other which amounts to deviation from the above 
mentioned administrative instructions on the subject.  
3. 
The Prime Minister has taken a serious notice of the above practice and 
has been pleased to observe that current charge is a temporarily arrangement to run day 
to day work of Organizations. Extensions are frequently made without any cogent 
reasons and without making arrangements for regular appointment to the post.  
4. 
In view of the above, all Federal Secretaries/Additional Secretaries 
Incharge of Ministries/Divisions are requested to ensure that the administrative instruct-
ions regarding current charge arrangements as mentioned above are being compiled with 
in its letter and spirit in the Ministries/Divisions/Departments and Organizations under 
their administrative control and current charge arrangements are made only for cogent 
and valid reasons while simultaneously making arrangements for regular appointment to 
that post.  
[Authority.— Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 8/9/2004-R-II dated 02-02-2017] 
  
5.10 
Combination of Appointments  
 
Reference paras of the instructions contained in Establishment Division 
O.M.No.1/21/75-AER.R.2 dated 19.8.1989 which provide that additional charge 
arrangement in non-identical post in BPS 17 to 19 requires approval of the Establishment 
Secretary. The above instructions have been reviewed in the light of amendment in rule 6 
of the Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973 notified vide 
SRO No.276(1)/2000, dated 25.5.2000 under which Secretaries of the Ministries/ 
Divisions concerned have been authorized to make appointment to posts in BPS 17 to 19 
consequent upon the aforesaid amendment in rules additional charge arrangement in 
non-identified posts to BPS 17 to 19 now requires approval of Secretary of the 
Ministries/ Divisions concerned. Cases involving additional charge of posts borne on the 
cadre of APUG and OMG shall, however, continue to be submitted for the approval of 
Establishment Division. The instructions contained in Establishment Division O.M. 
No.1/21/76-AR-1/R-II dated 19.8.1989 stand amended accordingly. 
 
2.  
Ministries/Divisions are requested to bring the above instructions to the 
notice of all departments concerned. 
[Authority:– Establishment Division‘s O.M.No.1/15/2000-R.2, dated 02.10.2000]. 
                                                          
For foundation of the concept ‗Combination of Appointments‘ see FR 49 and Government decisions 
reproduced below FR 49, PP 82-86 Compilation of Fundamental  Rules and Supplementary Rules, First 
Edition (Second Reprint), Manager of Publications, Karachi, 1979. For financial compensation. 
All Pakistan Services (Change in Nomenclature) Rules, 1973, notified vide SRO 1307(I)/73 dated 14-09-
1973, have been repealed vide SRO 89(I)/2014 dated 14-02-2014, whereby all notifications and instructions 
issued on the subject from time to time were mutatis mutandis amended.   

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                     Page - 379 
 
 
 
5.11 Combination of Appointments -  
Authorization to Secretaries 
 
Reference the Establishment Division‘s OM No. 1/21/76-AR/I/R,2 dated 19.8. 
1989 as amended vide its OM No.1/15/2000-R.2, dated 2.10.2000 on the subject 
according  to which additional charge arrangements in non-identical posts in BPS 17 to 
BPS 19 can be made with the approval of the Secretary of the Ministry/Division 
concerned and for the posts borne on the cadre of APUG and ***OMG with the 
approval of Establishment Secretary and those in BPS 20 and above with the approval of 
Prime Minister. 
 
2. 
In view of the current policy of decentralization of the government, the 
instructions contained in the above referred OM have been reviewed. The Prime Minister 
has been pleased to authorize the Secretaries of the Ministries/ Divisions to approve 
additional charge arrangements in non-identical posts in BPS 17 to BPS 20. This 
arrangement should not be made for a period of less than one month and should not 
exceed three months. However, it may be extended by another three months with the 
concurrence of the Establishment Division. Extension of such arrangements beyond six 
months shall be made with the approval of the Prime Minister. 
 
3. 
The instructions contained in para 2 & 3 of the Establishment Division‘s 
OM No. 1/21/76-AR.I/R2 dated 19.8.1989 and No. 1/15/2000-R.2 dated 2-10-2000 stand 
modified to the extent indicated above. 
 [Authority: Estt. Div.‘s OM NO. 3/89/2004-R-2, dated 01-01-2005] 
 
5.12 
Additional Charge Appointment:  
Procedure and Remuneration 
 
Reference Finance Division's circular O.M. No. F. 4(14)-R. 4/68, dated the 9th  
September,1971@, the position has been reviewed and in order to afford sufficient 
compensation to a government servant entrusted with the additional charge@@ of a vacant 
identical post, it has been decided, with the approval of the competent authority, that in case 
of additional charge arrangement, special allowance shall be admissible at a uniform rate of 
20% of basic pay not exceeding @Rs. 12,000/- p.m. with effect from 1st July 2016 @@@(In 
case of Additional Charge of Identical post 20% of the Basic Pay subject to maximum 
Rs.12,000/- and in case of Additional Charge of Non-Identical post 10% of the Basic Pay 
subject to maximum Rs.12,000/- w.e.f 01-07-2016), subject to the fulfillment of the 
following conditions:— 
                                                          
 For foundation of the concept ‗Combination of Appointments‘, FR 49 and Government decisions reproduced 
below FR 49, pages 82-86, Compilation of the Fundamental Rules and Supplementary Rules, First Edition 
(Secondary Reprint), Manager of Publications, Karachi : 1979. For financial compensation. 
All Pakistan Services (Change in Nomenclature) Rules, 1973, notified vide SRO 1307(I)/73 dated 14-09-
 
1973, have been repealed vide SRO 89(I)/2014 dated 14-02-2014, whereby all notifications and instructions 
 
issued on the subject from time to time were mutatis mutandis amended.   
*** Office Management Group. 
@  Page 85 of the FR & SR. 
@@ Current charge appointment is now regulated. 
@@@ Revised & added vide Finance Division O.M. No. F.1(2)/Imp/2016-333, dated 01-07-2016. 

Page - 380                      ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-04                         
 
 
(i) 
The work of the vacant post, may, as far as possible, be distributed among 
more than one government servant of the same status and designation 
available in the Ministries/ Divisions/Departments. 
 
(ii) 
Where the distribution of the work among more than one government 
servant is not feasible, the charge of the vacant post may be entrusted, in its 
entirety, to another government servant. This arrangement should not be 
made for a period less than one month and should not exceed three months, 
and it should be allowed with specific approval of the Secretaries/Additional 
Secretaries/Heads of Attached Departments / Heads of Department not 
below BPS 21. However, it may be extended by another three months with 
the approval of next higher authority. 
 
(iii) Immediately on the expiry of six months of the full additional charge of the 
particular vacant post, the post shall be treated as having been abolished and 
its duties automatically becoming part of the normal duties of the other 
existing posts of the same category in the Divisions/Departments concerned. 
The post so treated as abolished shall not be reviewed without the 
concurrence of the Financial Adviser concerned. 
 
2. 
Finance Division's O.M. No. 4(14)-R.4/68, dated the 9th September, 1971 
shall be deemed to have been cancelled with effect from 1st February, 1987. 
[Authority:– Finance Division‘s O.M. No. F.2(9)-R-3/85, dated 18-3-1987]. 
 
5.13 
Combination of Charge/Additional Charge 
Appointment not to be Notified 
 
The Finance Division's O.M.No.F.4(14)R.4/68, dated 9-9-1971 authorizes grant of 
Special Pay at various specified rates in cases in which, in accordance with para 2(ii) of that 
circular, the charge of the vacant post of an officer in an establishment is entrusted in its 
entirety to another officer of the same status, category and designation in that establishment. 
A question was raised whether this combination of charges, where the post and the officer 
concerned belong to a BPS higher than Grade 15, needs or does not need to be notified in 
the gazette, in order for the above special pay to become payable. The matter has been 
considered in consultation with the Establishment Division. The position is that the 
combination of charge in the above category of cases [unlike the combination of 
appointments under F. R. 49 or under para 1(2) (c) of the pre-Independence Government of 
India, Finance Department's O.M. No. F.7(3)-EII/46, dated 26-9-1946] would not have the 
effect of bringing about any change either in the status of the officer concerned or in his 
competence to perform official duties. It has accordingly been held that notification, in the 
gazette, of the combination of charges authorised under para 2(ii) of the above mentioned 
circular dated 9-9-1971, would be uncalled for. 
 
2. 
It follows that in cases of the kind referred to in the preceding para, issue of 
an official letter conveying the approval of the competent authority to the combination of 
charges in question and to the grant of special pay in accordance with para 2(ii) of the 
circular dated 9-9-1971 referred to above, would constitute sufficient authority for the Audit 
to allow the relevant rate of special pay to the officer concerned. 
[Authority: Finance Division‘s O.M.No.D.907-R.4/76-F.4 (19)R.1/76, dated 6-10-1976]. 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                     Page - 381 
 
 
 
5.14 
Appointment on Acting Charge Basis 
 
Reference rule 8-A of the Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) 
Rules, 1973, and to state that a civil servant, on appointment to hold a post on Acting 
Charge basis, shall – 
 
(a) 
assume full duties and responsibility of the post and exercise all statutory, 
administrative and financial powers vested in the regular incumbent of the 
post; and 
 
(b) 
during the period of such appointment, be entitled to draw fixed pay equal to 
the minimum stage of the pay at which his pay would have been fixed, had 
he been appointed to that post on regular basis. Service rendered on acting 
charge basis in the scale applicable to the post shall not count for purposes of 
drawal of increments in that BPS. It shall, however, count towards 
increments in the scale of pay held immediately before appointment on 
acting charge basis so that on reversion from acting charge appointment his 
pay in the lower BPS should be fixed at the same stage which he would have 
reached, but for appointment to the higher BPS; 
 
Provided that if at any time during his appointment on acting charge basis, his 
substantive pay exceeds his pay fixed on acting charge appointment, he will draw his 
substantive pay. 
 
[Explanation.– For the purpose of this proviso, officiating pay drawn in a post held 
on regular basis continuously for three years (including period of leave) or which would 
have been drawn for that period but for appointment on acting charge basis shall be treated 
as substantive pay]. 
 [Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.1/9/80-R II(B), dated 12-1-1981 as amended  
vide O.M.No.1/1/82-R 2 dated 15-8-1983]. 
 
5.15 
Acting Charge Appointment – Counting of Service 
 
Reference sub-para (b) of Establishment Division's O.M.No. 1/9/80-R.II(B) dated 
12th January, 1981 as amended vide O.M.No. 1/1/82/R.2, dated 15th August, 1983. It is 
stated that, in partial modification of the said orders, it has been decided that the service 
rendered on acting charge basis in respect of appointments falling under rules 8-B(l) and 
8-B(3) of the Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973 count in 
the pay scale applicable to the post for the purposes of accrual of increments subject to 
fulfillment of the following:— 
(i) 
In case of acting charge appointments to posts carrying BPS 18, the 
incumbents shall have completed 5 years service in BPS 17. 
(ii) 
In case of acting charge appointments to posts carrying BPS 19 and above the 
incumbents shall have completed the prescribed length of service for 
respective posts as under:- 
 
 
(a) Posts in BPS 19 
 
 12 years service in BPS 17 and above. 
                                                          
 Amended vide Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.1/25/83-R 2 dated 31-03-1986. 

Page - 382                      ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-04                         
 
 
 
(b) Posts in BPS 20      
17 years service  in BPS 17 and above. 
 
 
(c) Posts in BPS 21      
22 years service  in BPS 17 and above. 
 
2. 
The above decision shall be effective from the First January, 1985.  
However, in cases of acting charge appointments made during the period from 12th  January, 
1981 to 31st December, 1984, the increments shall be restored from the due dates but no 
arrears due on account of restoration of increments prior to 1st January, 1985 shall be allowed.          
 [Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.1/25/83-R.2, dated 27-3-1985]. 
5.16 Clarification About the Look After Charge 
Refer to the subject cited and to say that a number of instances have come to the 
notice of Establishment Division where the Ministries/Divisions have been found 
indulging in the practice of assigning look after charge of higher post to an officer during 
the absence its actual incumbent which cause administrative/ financial inconvenience. 
2. 
In this context it is clarified that there is no provision of look after charge in 
Civil Servants Act,1973 and Rules made thereunder, rather an officer can be deputed 
temporarily as an internal arrangement to look after the work of another post for disposal 
of day to day work of urgent and routine nature in the Ministry/Division/Organization 
concerned.  
3. 
As a matter of principle, the senior most officer is normally asked by the head 
of the Division/Department to look after the work of a post when its incumbent is 
temporarily away. Regarding the decision making process, there may be certain issues 
which are of quasi-judicial nature and decision cannot be taken by an officer not 
formally designated to exercise those powers. Likewise, certain financial and 
administrative powers can only be exercised by an officer to whom additional/current 
charge of the post is entrusted in the prescribed manner. An officer looking after the 
work cannot exercise such powers as he has not been delegated with such powers by the 
competent authority. As regards day to day decisions, these can be taken by an officer 
looking after the work and can also be reviewed/revised by the head of the Organization 
depending upon the merit of the case.  
4. 
Ministries/Divisions are requested to disseminate the above position to all the 
Departments/Offices under their administrative control.  
[Authority.— Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 3/15/2016-R-II dated 09-04-2021] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                     Page - 383 
 
 
V. ADHOC APPOINTMENTS 
 
6.1 
Advertisement for Ad-Hoc Appointments   
 
Attention is invited to Establishment Division's Notification No. 1498(I)/73, 
dated 20th October, 1973 regarding Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and 
Transfer) Rules, 1973. 
 
2. 
In accordance with Part IV dealing with ad-hoc and temporary 
appointments, rule 19 lays down that the post shall be advertised and the same procedure 
as laid down for the initial appointment in Part III shall be followed for making ad-hoc 
appointments. 
   
3. 
A number of cases have come to notice where ad-hoc appointments have 
been made from amongst departmental candidates or from other applicants without an 
advertisement having been made in the press. 
 
4. 
This is irregular in future, no proposal for ad-hoc appointments will be 
entertained unless the post has been duly advertised.  The summary of the case submitted 
to the Establishment Division should invariably state that the post has been advertised 
and the clipping of the advertisement should be enclosed with the summary. 
 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 2/23/78-D.III, dated 17-4-1978]. 
6.2 
Ad-Hoc Appointees to be Clearly Told of the 
Conditions of Their Appointments 
 
It has been noticed that various Ministries/Divisions etc. while advertising 
posts, falling within the purview of the FPSC, for purposes of making ad-hoc 
appointments thereto, do not take into account the fact that the appointees on the basis of 
such advertisements, being replaceable by the FPSC nominees, should be clearly told of 
this condition of their appointments.  This omission on the part of various Ministries/ 
Divisions, etc. may give rise to complications later on. 
 
2. 
It is, therefore, requested that, while advertising for ad-hoc appointments 
to such posts, the Ministries/Divisions etc. should categorically state that the candidates 
appointed on the basis of such advertisements will be replaceable by the FPSC 
nominees. The condition may also be communicated to the candidates in the letters/ 
notifications of such appointments so that no appointee claims regular appointment 
subsequently on the basis of advertisement or appointment letters/notifications. 
 
3. 
It may also be ensured that requisition for such posts should invariably be 
sent to the Commission within two months of the filling up of such posts on ad-hoc basis. 
 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.2/6/74-F.IV, dated 14-6-1974]. 
6.3 
Proposals for Continuance of  
Ad-Hoc Appointments 
 
It has been observed that placing of requisitions on the Federal Public Service 
Commission in respect of posts required to be filled through the Commission are delayed 
by the Ministries/Divisions without any justification and ad-hoc appointments made on 
such posts are continued for long periods. 

Page - 384                      ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-04                         
 
 
2. 
In this connection, attention is invited to Rule 18 of the Civil Servants 
(Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973, which requires that a requisition in 
the prescribed form shall be forwarded to the Federal Public Service Commission 
immediately when it is decided to fill the post in question or, if that is not practicable and 
the post is filled on ad-hoc basis, within two months of the filling of the post. 
 
3. 
It is, therefore, reiterated that while making ad-hoc appointments against 
posts falling within the purview of the Federal Public Service Commission, a requisition 
should be placed on the Commission immediately and in any case not later than two 
months from the date of filling the post on ad-hoc basis. All proposals relating to ad-hoc 
appointments and their further continuance should, in future be accompanied by a copy 
of the requisition sent to the Commission as far as possible, otherwise the Establishment 
Division may not consider such proposals. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.2/9/76-D-III, dated 4-6-1976]. 
 
 
6.4 
Ad-Hoc Appointments and 
Approval for Extension 
 
Reference Establishment Division's Office Memo No. 2/9/76-D.III, dated 14th 
March, 1981. It is stated that the instructions contained therein for making appointment 
to posts on ad-hoc basis and seeking extensions thereto are not being complied with 
faithfully. These instructions clearly provide for making ad-hoc appointment for a period 
not exceeding six months with the approval of competent authority as laid down under 
rule 6 of the Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973, as 
amended.  The first extension beyond the initial period of ad-hoc appointment is required 
to be given after obtaining approval of the FPSC. As such, the approval of the competent 
authority for this extension is not required. Subsequent extensions for periods not 
exceeding six months in the ad-hoc appointment shall not require concurrence of the 
FPSC but approval of competent authority shall, in any case, be obtained. All the 
Ministries/Divisions are requested to bring these instructions to the notice of all the 
departments/ organizations under their administrative control for compliance. 
 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M.No. 10/8/86-R.2, dated 15-12-1986]. 
 
 6.5 Submission of Summaries Regarding  
Ad-Hoc Appointments 
 
In the appendix to the Establishment Division d.o. letter No. 4/20/74-A.IV, 
dated the 29th June 1976 detailed procedure governing the submission of cases of ad-hoc 
appointments has been outlined. It has, however, been noticed that proposals for ad-hoc 
appointments, which have considerably increased of late, are not submitted in 
accordance with the instructions laid down therein.  Ad-hoc appointments are to be made 
only in cases of extreme urgency. But non-adherence to the prescribed procedure leads to 
delay in their finalization. It is, therefore, reiterated that– 
(i) 
the device of ad-hoc appointment should be resorted to only in cases of 
genuine urgency; 
(ii) 
the post should be widely advertised/circulated; 
(iii) regional/provincial quotas should be strictly observed; and 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                     Page - 385 
 
 
(iv) particulars of all the applicants should be sent alongwith detailed reasons 
why the person recommended has been selected. 
 
2.  
Cases where the above procedure has not been followed will have to be 
returned to the Ministries un-disposed of. 
 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s d.o. letter No.4/20/74-A.IV, dated 9-4-1977]. 
6.6 
Seniority of Ad-Hoc Appointees for Purposes of Reversion or 
Termination of Services on Availability of Regular Appointees 
 
No rules or instructions regarding determination of the seniority of ad-hoc 
appointees have so far been issued.  This is due to the fact that ad-hoc service does not 
reckon for purposes of seniority when the ad-hoc appointment is later on converted to 
regular appointment. Instructions have also been issued in Establishment Division's O.M. 
No. 3/29/70-D- III, dated the 7th January, 1971 that ad-hoc appointees should not be 
promoted to a higher grade. The question of determination of the seniority of the ad-
hoc appointees for purposes of promotion, therefore, does not arise.  However, 
sometimes the question which does arise is as to which one of the several ad-hoc 
appointees should be reverted when the F.P.S.C. qualified candidates become available. 
It has been decided that reversion should be made in the reverse order of ad-hoc 
appointment.  However, when the date of ad-hoc appointment of more than one officer is 
one and the same, the reversion should be made in the reverse order of the seniority in 
the lower grade if available, otherwise the younger in age should revert first.  Reversion 
for the purposes of this O.M. includes termination of service where the ad-hoc appointee 
was recruited directly from outside. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.1(8)/72-D.II, dated 4-5-1972]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
 BPS/Post.  

Page - 386                      ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-04                         
 
VI. 
RE-APPOINTMENTS 
 
7.1 
Re-appointment to Grade 17 or Above Posts  
 
It appears that some doubt still exists in some quarters about the procedure to be 
followed in the following cases:- 
(a) 
In case of re-appointment to a post in *Grade 17 or above of an officer whose 
―first appointment‖ to a post in *Grade 17 or above was made with the approval 
of the [President/ Prime Minister]. 
(b) 
In case of appointment to hold full charge of a post in *Grade 17 or above, 
of an officer who had already been holding current charge of the post. 
 
2.  
The approval of the **[President/Prime Minister] is not necessary for 
re-appointment of an officer to a post in *Grade 17 or above whose earlier appointment to 
that post was made with the approval of the **[President/ Prime Minister] and who was 
subsequently reverted from that post due to no fault of his own.  However, where reversion 
was made as a result of some disciplinary action, fresh approval of the **[President/Prime 
Minister] would be necessary, if the officer is subsequently re-promoted to a post in *Grade 
17 or above. 
 
3. 
When an officer is appointed to hold current charge of a post in *Grade 17 or 
above with the approval of the President/ Prime Minister, similar approval of the 
**[President/Prime Minister] is required when the same officer is appointed to hold full 
charge of the post. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.10/2/64-D.I, dated 13-8-1964, as amended  
vide O.M. No.3/20/70-D.III, dated 16-9-1970]. 
 
7.2 
Re-appointment to Posts and  
Selection Board 
 
In continuation of the instructions issued in the Establishment Division Office 
Memorandum No. 3/20/70-D III, dated the 16th September, 1970 it has been decided that if 
the re-appointment of an officer to a post in *Grade 17 and above took place after more than 
one year of the reversion from that post, the case should be placed before the Central 
Selection Board for determining the continued fitness of the officer to hold a post in *Grade 
17 or above.  After the approval of the Central Selection Board, it would not be necessary to 
refer the case to the **[President/ Prime Minister] again. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.3/20/70-D.III, dated 16-9-1971]. 
 
7.3 
Appointment of Secretaries to Government 
 
Appointment of Secretaries/Acting Secretaries to the Government are made on the 
recommendation of the Ministers concerned with the approval of the President. There are, 
                                                          
 BPS. 
Note Below:— 
 Now appointing authorities may be seen in light of Rule-6 of APT Rules,1973. 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                     Page - 387 
 
 
however, standing instructions on the subject as contained in the Establishment Division 
Office Memorandum No. 33 (3)/54-SEI, dated the 29th September, 1954. 
 
2. 
In terms of the Office Memorandum mentioned above, before any 
appointment of Secretary/Acting Secretary is decided upon, the Establishment Division 
should be required to submit a factual note about possible candidates, covering such matters 
as service, eligibility, tenure, etc., together with their Character Rolls. In practice, however, 
Ministers tend to make these appointments without consulting the Establishment Division.  
The President has, therefore, been pleased to observe that it is very necessary to follow the 
procedure laid down in this respect.   
 
3. 
It has been decided that henceforth all notifications relating to appointments 
of Secretaries/Acting Secretaries shall be issued by the Establishment Division instead of the 
Ministries, as has been the practice so far. This course is necessary to avoid notifications 
being found legally or otherwise defective, as has been found to be the case in some 
instances. In order to enable this Division to issue the necessary notification, Ministries will 
send the file to the Establishment Division after Prime Minister's orders have been obtained 
regarding such appointments. 
[Authority:– Estt. Secretary's d.o. letter No.26(10)/63-AI, dated 31-8-1963 and Estt. Secretary's d.o. 
letter No.26(19)/63-A. 1, dated 31-8-1963]. 
7.4 
Notifications Regarding Postings,  
Transfers etc. of Officers of the Status  
of Joint Secretary and Above 
 
It has been noticed by the Establishment Division that Ministries/ Divisions are not 
fully aware of the correct procedure with regard to obtaining orders for appointment to posts 
in the Ministries/Divisions and issue of notifications in respect of appointments to such posts.  
The correct procedure in this regard has, therefore, been explained in the following 
paragraphs. 
 
2.  
According to the existing instructions, appointments to the grade of Secretary, 
Additional Secretary, Acting Secretary and Joint Secretary fall under the purview of the High 
Level Selection Board while appointments to the posts of Deputy Secretary to the 
Government of Pakistan [........] come within the scope of the Central Selection Board. The 
recommendation of the High Power Selection Board/Central Selection Board in respect of 
these officers have to be obtained by the Establishment Division. Thereafter, action is 
required to be taken in the following sequence:- 
 
(i) 
Approval of the President to the recommendation of the appropriate 
Selection Board. 
 
(ii) 
(a)  
Decision in the Establishment Division in consultation with 
Ministries/Divisions to post an approved officer to a particular post, 
and 
                                                          
 Now Prime Minister. 
 The word ‘Section Officer’ omitted. 
 Note:- The Prime Minister is now the appointing authority for posts in BPS 20 and above vide rule 6 of the 
Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973. 

Page - 388                      ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-04                         
 
 
 
(b)  
Submission of a summary to the President for his specific approval 
 
to such appointment. 
 
(iii) Issue of notification by the Establishment Division making the actual 
appointment. 
 
(iv) Issue of notification by the Ministries/Divisions concerned regarding 
assumption of charge of the particular post by the selected officer. 
 
3.  
Action with regard to (i) and (iii) above is required to be taken by the 
Establishment Division alone.  Approval of the President to the appointment of a particular 
officer to a particular post is at present taken by the administrative Division in which the 
vacancy exists. This has led to some unforeseen and unhappy consequences, e.g., 
unwillingness of the administrative Divisions to accept particular officers and allowing the 
officers to assume charge of their duties before a formal notification has been issued by the 
Establishment Division.  In order to avoid such difficulties, it has now been decided that 
approval of the *President to all Secretariat appointments would be taken by the 
Establishment Division, in consultation with the Ministries/Divisions. 
 
4.  
The next step would be to issue a further notification regarding assumption 
of charge of the particular post by the selected officer. This notification is to be issued by the 
Ministries/ Divisions concerned. It is, however, emphasised that assumption of charge by 
the selected officer cannot be from a date prior to but subsequent to the date of notification 
regarding his appointment by the Establishment Division. In no case can the selected officer 
assume charge from a date earlier than the date of notification issued by the Establishment 
Division. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.22/25/68-Al, dated 23-1-1969]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
 Note:- The Prime Minister is now the appointing authority for posts in BPS 20 and above vide rule 6 of the 
Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973. 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                     Page - 389 
 
 
VII. MANNER OF SUBMISSION OF CASES 
 
8.1 
Manner of Submission of Cases 
to the Establishment Minister  
 
The summaries for the Establishment Minister received from the Ministries/ 
Divisions are found deficient in many respects and do not always contain all the relevant 
information which has, therefore, to be obtained formally or informally resulting in delays 
and loss of time.  It is, therefore, requested that Summaries for the Establishment Minister* or 
papers for Central Selection Board seeking approval to an appointment by promotion, direct 
recruitment, transfer or re-employment, etc. may kindly be prepared in the following 
manner:- 
(i) 
The subject should be stated in concise and self-explanatory manner. 
(ii) 
The Summary should begin by indicating the number of vacancies and how 
they have arisen. 
(iii) It should then state how these vacancies have to be filled in under the 
relevant recruitment rules i.e. whether they are to be filled directly, by 
promotion or by transfer etc. If they are to be filled directly the regional/ 
provincial quota to which they belong may be specifically indicated. 
(iv) In any case, the qualifications and conditions of eligibility for appointment 
prescribed in the recruitment rules should be stated either in the Summary or 
in the Annex thereto.  If necessary, a copy of the recruitment rules may be 
enclosed. 
(v) 
The Summary must also indicate the action taken to fill the vacancy viz. 
whether the post has been notified to F.P.S.C. or directly advertised for ad-
hoc appointment etc. and whether F.P.S.C./ Departmental Selection 
Committee have recommended any candidate. In the case of promotions, the 
fact that D.P.C. or the C.S.B., as the case may be, has approved the 
promotion should be stated alongwith the minutes. 
 (vi) Full information as to qualifications, experience etc. of candidates 
recommended for appointment/ promotion/ transfer should be given 
alongwith clear indication of their place in the seniority list.  The candidate's 
domicile should be precisely stated.  Where proposed promotion would 
involve supersession, detailed justification thereto may be given alongwith 
names etc. of all the eligible candidates and their C.Rs in order of seniority 
including those who are proposed to be passed over. Otherwise a clear 
certificate may be given that no supersession is involved. 
 
2. 
It is requested that the Summaries may please be typed in double space on 
Summary paper and henceforth two copies of each Summary (alongwith enclosures) should 
be invariably sent to the Establishment Division so that the original is returned with the 
orders of the Establishment Minister and the duplicate retained in the Establishment 
Division for record. 
                                                          
 Cases are, at present, submitted by the Establishment Division to the Prime Minister. 

Page - 390                      ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-04                         
 
 
3. 
In case the Summaries are not received in the above mentioned manner, the 
same may have to be returned causing delay in according necessary approval. 
[Authority:– Estt. Secretary's d.o., letter No.4/20/74-A IV, dated 11-12-1974]. 
8.2 
Check List of Information/ Material in Cases to  
be submitted to the Establishment Minister 
 
In order to facilitate proper submission of summaries by the Ministries/Divisions, a 
complete check list of information/material to be incorporated in or attached to the 
summaries in respect of cases requiring the approval of the Establishment Minister is 
enclosed as Appendix. It is requested that in future it may kindly be ensured that this 
information/ material is invariably incorporated in/or furnished with the summaries.  
Otherwise the summaries will not be processed in this Division and will be returned to the 
Ministries/ Divisions. 
[Authority:– Special Secretary (Estt.) d.o. letter No.4/20/74-A.IV, dated 29-6-1976]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
 Cases submitted to the Prime Minister or other appointing authority, as the case may be. 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                     Page - 391 
 
 
APPENDIX 
CHECK LIST FOR SUBMISSION OF SUMMARIES FOR 
THE ESTABLISHMENT MINISTER 
A. 
GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS: 
(i)  
The summary is to be typed in double space. 
(ii)  Two copies of each summary (alongwith enclosures) are to be sent to the 
Establishment Division. 
(iii)  The summary should contain specific recommendation of the Minister 
incharge about the proposal made in it. 
(iv)  The number of vacancies and how they have arisen. 
(v)  A copy of the recruitment rules approved by the Establishment Division.  
Otherwise, a copy of the draft recruitment rules or method of recruitment, 
qualifications and experience determined for the post(s) in consultation with 
the Establishment Division. 
(vi)  Number of sanctioned posts; their distribution into promotion, direct 
recruitment and transfer quotas. Complete list of officers holding promotion 
posts.  List of officers holding merit quota posts and regional distribution of 
posts reserved for direct recruitment alongwith the names and domicile of 
the incumbents holding these posts. 
B. 
APPOINTMENTS BY PROMOTION: 
(i)   
A copy of the minutes of the meeting of the Departmental Promotion 
Committee. 
(ii)   
An authenticated copy of the seniority list. 
(iii)   
Full justification for supersession, if any. 
(iv)   
Up-to-date C.R. dossiers of the officers recommended for promotion or 
supersession. 
(v)   
An abstract of the performance evaluation reports for the last five years in 
respect of officers recommended for promotion, supersession or to be 
ignored being on deputation etc. in the proforma as per Annex I, ―C‖ and 
―D‖ entries to be written in red ink. 
(vi)   
An abstract of the major personal traits for the last five years of officers 
recommended for promotion or supersession vide proforma as per Annex 
II, ―C‖ and ―D‖ entries to be written in red ink. 
(vii)   If an officer recommended for promotion is on deputation with an 
organization under the Federal or Provincial Governments or autonomous/ 
semi-autonomous organization, foreign government or an international 
organization, it may be clearly stated if the deputation is in the interest of 
public service or not. 

Page - 392                      ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-04                         
 
(viii) 
If the officer recommended for promotion is on deputation from another 
organization a copy of the written consent of that organization to his 
promotion is to be furnished to the Establishment Division. 
(ix) 
A certificate that the officers recommended for promotion in a particular 
BPS possess the required length of service in the lower BPS as laid down 
in the Establishment Division O.M. No. 1/9/80-R. 2 dated 2nd June, 1983. 
(x)   
In case of promotion to BPS19 and above, a copy of the minutes of the 
meeting of the Central Selection Board together with C.R. dossiers of the 
officers recommended for promotion. 
C.  
AD-HOC APPOINTMENTS: 
(i)  
Regional quotas to which the vacancies fall. 
(ii)   Whether the posts were advertised in the press?  If so, a copy of such 
advertisement to be attached. 
(iii)   Whether the vacancies have been notified to the FPSC for making regular 
recruitment against them?  If so, a copy of the requisition placed with the 
FPSC is to be attached. 
(iv)   Full particulars of the candidates tested/interviewed together with their 
assessment by the Selection Committee. 
(v)   A copy of the minutes of the meeting of the Selection Committee. 
(vi)   Bio-data of the candidates recommended. 
(vii) Up-to-date C. R. dossier of the candidate being recommended for ad-hoc 
appointment, if he or she has served in an organization under the Federal or 
Provincial Government. 
(viii) In case of extension in the period of ad-hoc appointment of an officer 
confidential report on his performance for previous period(s) should be 
attached. 
D. 
APPOINTMENT THROUGH THE FPSC: 
(i) 
Nomination letter from the FPSC. 
(ii)   Advertisement issued by the FPSC. 
(iii)  Regional quota to which the vacancy is allocable. 
(iv)   Up-to-date PER dossier of the candidate selected by the FPSC, if he or she 
is/was in Government service. 
(v)   Bio-data of the selected candidates or their applications addressed to the 
FPSC. 
                                                          
 Annual Confidential Report re-categorized as Annual Restricted Report; hence ARR.  

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                     Page - 393 
 
 
E.  
APPOINTMENT BY TRANSFER: 
(i)   A certificate that the candidate recommended is holding equivalent post on 
regular basis in his parent organization. 
(ii)  Up-to-date *PER dossier of the officer recommended for transfer. 
(iii)  Whether the transfer is permissible under the recruitment rules? 
(iv)   Minutes of the meeting of the DPC/Selection Committee. 
F. 
APPOINTMENT BY RE-EMPLOYMENT: 
(i)    A copy of the minutes of the meeting of the Central Selection Board. 
(ii)   Bio-data of the candidate recommended for re-employment including age 
and educational qualifications. 
(iii)   Up-to-date *PER dossier of the officer recommended for re-employment. 

Page - 394                      ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      CHAPTER-04                         
 
 
 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                     Page - 395 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX II 
(See B(vi) ) 
 
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF MAJOR PERSONAL TRAITS IN RESPECT OF BEING CONSIDERED 
FOR PROMOTION TO BPS 

Page - 396                     ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-04 
 
 
VIII. 
 MODE OF NOTIFICATION FOR APPOINTMENTS,  
PROMOTIONS ETC 
9.1 
Mode of Notifying Appointments,  
Promotions etc., after Introduction  
of the Scheme of Basic Pay Scales  
 
Reference is invited to the Finance Division O.M. No.1(I)-Imp/83, dated 18th  
August, 1983 laying down a scheme of basic pay scales and fringe benefits for the civil 
employees of the Federal Government as shown in the schedule to that O.M. It is laid down 
in the aforesaid O.M. that basic scales shall not be regarded as ‗grades' and shall not be 
referred to as ‗grades' in official communications and that the officials shall henceforth be 
appointed/promoted to posts and not in grades. 
 
*2. 
All the notifications, summaries and office notes, the name of the post and its 
pay scale may also be mentioned, where necessary. 
 
3. 
In pursuance of the aforesaid decisions, necessary amendments to the Civil 
Servants Act, 1973 and the rules made thereunder have been carried out replacing reference 
to ‗grades' by corresponding basic pay scales. 
 
4. 
It is requested that in future all the notifications and orders relating to initial 
appointment, appointment by promotion or by transfer and other appointment like ad-hoc 
appointments should invariably mention appointments to posts and not to grades.  A few 
specimen of the draft notifications are also enclosed for guidance. This form normally be 
used. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 3/11/83-R. 2, 15-04-1984 and dated *13-01-1985]. 
Draft 1 Promotion 
No……………….. 
GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN 
MINISTRY OF .......... 
............. Division 
Islamabad, the ............. 
NOTIFICATION 
 
Mr...................................... is promoted ..............to the post of ............. *promoted on 
officiating basis .............. and is posted as....... in the Ministry/Division/Office of................. 
until further orders. 
 
Deputy Secretary 
 
to the Government of Pakistan 
                                                          
*To be used in cases of promotion in temporary vacancies like leave or deputation vacancies.  Nature of the vacancy 
and the duration of promotion should be specified in the notification. 
 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 397 
 
 
To 
The Manager, 
Printing Corporation of Pakistan Press (PCP), 
Islamabad. 
 
 
Draft-2 Initial Appointment 
 
 
 
 
 
TO BE PUBLISHED IN PART-II OF THE GAZETTE OF 
PAKISTAN 
No……………. 
 
GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN 
MINISTRY OF............. 
................ Division 
Islamabad, the   ............... 
NOTIFICATION 
 
 
On 
selection 
by 
the 
Federal 
Public 
Service 
Commission, 
Mr........................................ is appointed as ............................ in the Ministry/Division/Office 
of ............... w.e.f the date he assumes charge of the post and until further orders. 
 
 
2.  
He shall remain on probation for a period of ............................. 
 
 
Deputy Secretary 
 
to the Government of Pakistan 
To 
The Manager, 
Printing Corporation of 
Pakistan Press, Islamabad 
 
 
Draft 3 Appointment by Transfer 
 
No………………….. 
 
GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN 
MINISTRY OF............. 
............... Division 
Islamabad, the    ............... 
NOTIFICATION 
 
 
Mr.............................................. is appointed by transfer to the post of............... in 
the Ministry/Division/ Office of........ and is posted as.............. 
 
 
2. He shall be on probation for a period of................................... 
 
 
Deputy Secretary 
 
to the Government of Pakistan 
 

Page - 398                     ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-04 
 
 
To 
The Manager, 
Printing Corporation of 
Pakistan Press, Islamabad 
 
 
Draft 4 Acting Appointment 
 
No……………. 
 
GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN 
MINISTRY OF .......... 
.............. Division 
 
Islamabad, the................... 
NOTIFICATION 
 
 
Mr......................... is appointed on acting charge basis to the post of......... in the 
Ministry/Division/Office of......... until further order and is posted as............ 
 
 
Deputy Secretary 
 
to the Government of Pakistan 
To                                      
The Manager, 
Printing Corporation of 
Pakistan Press, Islamabad 
 
 
Draft 5 Ad-Hoc Appointment 
No………………… 
 
GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN 
MINISTRY OF ............ 
............... Division 
 
Islamabad, the...... 
NOTIFICATION 
 
 
Mr....................... is appointed on ad-hoc basis as.................in the Ministry/ 
Division/Office of.................. for a period not exceeding six months or till the availability 
of a nominee of the Federal Public Service Commission, whichever is earlier. 
 
 
2. 
The appointment shall be terminable without notice on the appointment of 
a person selected by the Federal Public Service Commission. 
 
 
Deputy Secretary 
 
to the Government of Pakistan 
 
 
To 
The Manager,       
Printing Corporation of Pakistan Press,  
Islamabad 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 399 
 
 
9.2 
Continuance of the Practice of Notifying  
All Appointments in BS 16 or Above in  
the Gazette 
 
The Civil Servants (Change in Nomenclature of Services and Abolition of Classes) 
Rules, 1973, give formal effect to the abolition of classes announced by the Prime Minister 
on 20th August, 1973.  The classification of posts into gazetted and non-gazetted has also 
been abolished.  However, the practice of notifying all appointments to Basic Pay Scales 16 
and above in the Gazette will continue to be followed. 
 
*2. 
The appointments to the upgraded posts of *Stenographer (BPS 16) in 
Attached Departments are permitted to be notified in the official Gazette. 
[Authority:– Para 2 of Estt. Secretary's d.o. letter No.1/1/73-ARC, dated 10-11-1973 and *Estt. 
Division‘s O.M.No.11/57/80-F.Il(B-16) dated 15-1-1984 ]. 
 
9.3 
Approval of Competent Authority and  
Assumption of Charge 
 
In the Establishment Division O.M. No. 22/25/68-AI, dated the 23rd January, 1969 
, it was emphasized that the charge of a particular post could be assumed by a government 
servant, duly approved by the competent authority only from a date subsequent to the date on 
which the notification of his appointment was issued by the Establishment Division, and that 
in no case the government servant could assume charge from a date earlier than the date of 
notification issued by the Establishment Division, unless specifically stated. 
 
2. 
It has been noticed that the instructions referred to above have not been 
observed in a number of cases by the Ministries/ Divisions and, in some cases government 
servants were allowed to assume charge of the posts to which they were appointed by the 
Establishment Division, with effect from dates earlier than the dates of the notifications of 
their appointments issued by the Establishment Division.  In view of this, it is considered 
necessary to reiterate the position stated in para 1 above.  The fact that vacancies were 
available in certain cases from back dates, is not relevant, and no government servant can be 
allowed to assume charge of a higher post retrospectively only for that reason.  Further, in 
order to regularise the position, it is requested that all such cases should be reviewed and 
relevant notifications, if any, which may have been issued by the Ministries/Divisions in 
contravention of the instructions referred to above, should be cancelled immediately, and 
revised notifications issued, under intimation to the Establishment Division. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division O.M. No. 22/25/73-AV, dated 10-12-1973]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page - 400                     ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-04 
 
 
IX. 
SHORT TERM APPOINTMENTS 
 
10.1 Other Short-Term Appointments 
 
Temporary vacancies upto two months or more.– Orders were issued (vide 
Establishment Division Memorandum No. 54/27/ 53-ME, dated the 30th September, 1953 
and 14th November, 1953) to the effect that:- 
 
(i) 
No vacancy less than 4 months' duration should be filled; 
 
(ii) 
Vacancies exceeding 4 months should not normally be filled but may be 
filled under the personal orders of the Heads of Ministries/ Divisions/ 
Departments; 
 
(iii) Exception from (i) and (ii) above may be made in the case of technical staff. 
 
2.  
The question of filling of short-term vacancies has been considered further 
and it has since been decided, in supersession of the orders referred to above, that : 
(i) No vacancy upto 2 months should be filled; 
 (ii) Vacancies exceeding 2 months should not normally be filled but may be 
filled 
under 
the 
personal 
orders 
of 
the 
Heads 
of 
Ministries/ 
Divisions/Departments; 
 (iii) In case where the nature of work is such that the employment of staff for a 
short period is unavoidable in the interest of essential work, relaxation in 
respect of promotion or recruitment to vacancies of even less than 2 months 
duration should be made and such vacancies should be filled under the 
personal orders of the Heads of Ministries/Divisions/ Departments. Such 
relaxation should, however, be made only after consultation with the 
Establishment Division. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 54/27/53-ME, dated 8-4-1954 as amended  
vide O.M. No.11/4/61-F.II (XV), dated 6-4-1962]. 
Note.-The above orders do not apply to the case of Secretaries to Government for 
whom separate orders exist. 
 
10.2 
Vacancies Caused by Deputation  
of Officers Abroad 
 
There has been some confusion in the past in regard to the necessity or otherwise for 
creation of posts for making officiating arrangements in vacancies caused by the deputation of 
officers abroad.  The matter has been examined and the following instructions are issued for 
the guidance of Ministries/Divisions, etc.:- 
 
(1) 
When the officer hands over charge of his post.- The officer concerned is 
placed on special duty and is entirely detached from duties of the post which 
he ordinarily holds. A post of Officer on Special Duty would have to be 
created in the Ministry sponsoring his deputation and the vacancy created in 
his own Ministry can be filled up in the normal course. 
 
(2) 
When the officer does not hand over charge of his post.- The officer is not 
detached from the duties of his post and it is not necessary to make 
arrangements for the disposal of the work relating to the post due to the 
absence of its incumbent.  A new post in a lower BPS may be created with 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 401 
 
 
the sanction of the authority competent to create such lower post for the 
period of the officer's absence on duty. 
 
2. 
The instructions contained in the Ministry of Finance Office Memorandum 
No. 4561-EG.I/1/51, dated the 12th July, 1951, are hereby cancelled. 
[Authority:– Finance Division‘s O.M.No.3005-EG-1/52, dated 7-5-1952]. 
 
10.3 
Vacancies Caused by Suspension  
of Government Servants 
 
The question, whether a vacancy caused by suspension of a government servant can 
be filled up like other ordinary vacancies has been examined in consultation with the 
Ministry of Finance and the Law Division.  It has been decided that, though a vacancy 
caused by suspension of an officer cannot be filled up substantively, it can be filled up on an 
officiating basis, and that no supernumerary post need be created in such case. 
 
2.  
This supersedes Establishment Division's O.M. No. 2/14/67-CIII dated the 
19th September, 1968. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 6/2/71-DI, dated 20-9-1971]. 
 
10.4 Procedure for Creation of Posts of  
Officer on Special Duty (O.S.D.) and  
Making Appointments Thereto 
 
A question had arisen whether a procedure should be laid down for creation of 
posts of O.S.D. and making appointments to such posts. The posts of O.S.D. may be created 
for the following reasons:— 
 
(1) 
Government servants (member of a regularly constituted service or 
otherwise permanent) waiting for posting orders. 
         (2)  
Deputation of a government servant (member of a regularly constituted 
*service or otherwise deputed) for duty or course of instruction or training in 
Pakistan or training abroad, for a period exceeding two months, in 
accordance with the instructions contained in the Ministry of Finance 
O.M.No.3005-EGI/52, dated 7-5-1952. (Annex) 
 
(3) 
For doing work of a special nature, e.g. examination and/or implementation 
of reports of Commissions/ Committees etc. 
 
(4) For overcoming technical difficulties. 
 
 
2.  
In all such cases, concurrence of the Ministry of Finance/ Financial Adviser 
concerned will be necessary before the posts are created. 
                                                          
 or ‘group’. 
 Amended vide Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.11/3/79-DV, dated 11-10-1979.  

Page - 402                     ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-04 
 
 
 
3.  
As to the question of appointment to such posts, the matter has been 
considered in consultation with the Federal Public Service Commission and it has been 
decided that Establishment Division and the Commission need not be consulted in regard to 
appointment to the posts created for the reasons stated at para (1) and (2) above. 
 
4.  
In regard to posts created for the reasons stated at para 1 (3) and (4) above, it 
has been decided that such posts may be filled by suitable officers either by transfer or by 
promotion or by direct recruitment on the recommendation of the authority concerned. 
 
5.  
It has also been decided that the Establishment Division should be consulted 
before the Ministry of Finance are approached for creating a post of O.S.D. for the reasons 
stated at (4) above. 
 
6. 
 Apart from the cases as mentioned above, there may be instances in which a 
temporary government servant holding the post of O.S.D. may be sent for duty/training 
abroad. It has been decided that in such cases if the temporary government servant is holding 
the post with the approval of the Federal Public Service Commission or the Selection Board, 
no consultation will be necessary either with the Commission or the Establishment Division in 
the case of deputation for duty, but in the case of deputation for training the Establishment 
Division should be consulted. In the case of officers appointed without consultation with the 
Commission or Selection Board, the Establishment Division and the Commission both should 
be consulted before any such officer is deputed for duty or training abroad. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M. No.5(I)/8/67-DV, dated 19-9-1968] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 403 
 
 
ANNEX 
(See para 1(2)) 
[Copy of Finance Division O.M.No. 3005-EG.I/52, dated 7-5-1952.] 
Officiating Arrangements in Vacancies Caused by Deputation of Officers Abroad. 
 
There has been some confusion in the past in regard to the necessity or otherwise 
for creation of posts for making officiating arrangements in vacancies caused by the 
deputation of officers abroad. The matter has been examined and the following instructions 
are issued for the guidance of Ministries/Divisions etc:- 
(1) 
When the officer hands over charges of his post.– The officer concerned is 
placed on Special Duty and is entirely detached from the duties of the post 
which he ordinarily holds. A post of Officer on Special Duty would have to 
be created in the Ministry sponsoring his deputation and the vacancy created 
in his own Ministry can be filled up in the normal course. 
(2) 
When the officer does not hand over charge of his post.- The officer is not 
detached from the duties of his post and it is not necessary to create a 
temporary post. In case, however, it becomes necessary to make 
arrangements for the disposal of the work relating to the post due to the 
absence of its incumbent, a new post in a lower grade may be created with 
the sanction of the authority competent to create such lower post for the 
period of the officer's absence on duty.  
 
 
2. 
The instructions contained in this Ministry's Office Memorandum No.4561-
EB.I/ 1/51, dated the 12th July, 1951, are hereby cancelled. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page - 404                     ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-04 
 
 
X. 
APPOINTMENT OF CONSULTANTS 
 
11.1 
Re-employment of Consultant 
 
 
After the Age of Superannuation 
 
Reference the guidelines regulating the appointment of Consultants in Ministries/ 
Divisions and Organizations under their administrative control providing inter alia, the 
following, vide para 8(i) issued under U.O. No. 11-3/2001-MSW-III, dated 25-1-2002:— 
―8 (i) Engagement of retired officers as Consultants/Advisers etc. shall require 
prior permission of the government, invariably i.e. 
Establishment Division in case of retired civilian officers;  
Defence Division in case of retired defence officers; and 
Law, Justice and Human Rights Division/Supreme Court/ 
High Courts in case of retired judiciary officers. 
 
2. 
On the other hand instructions contained in Establishment Secretary d.o. 
No. 5/21/80-A.III/D.4/D.5, dated 18.12.1985 issued with the approval of the Prime 
Minister provide that consultancies granted after the age of superannuation will be treated 
as re-employment and will be subject to the same rules as are applicable to re-
employment after superannuation. 
 
3.  
With a view to drawing a distinction between the consultancies offered to 
retired officers only to re-employ them after superannuation and those retired/ 
superannuated officers who qualify for consultancy through open competition and are 
offered perks, privileges (package) laid down for that position, a Summary was submitted 
to the Prime Minister for approval of suitable modifications/clarifications to the 
instructions contained in Establishment Secretary‘s d.o letter No. 5/21/80-A.III/D.2/ D.5 
dated 18-12-1985. The Prime Minister has been pleased to approve that the re-
employment rules should apply to those government servants who are appointed on 
contract as Consultants or otherwise after superannuation without open competition. On 
the other hand, those retired government servants who compete with others in the private 
sector for a consultancy position on the basis of open competition and are selected on 
merit should be entitled to the package, perks and privileges laid down for that position. 
The contract offered without competition and open merit be governed by re-employment 
rules while consultants selected on the basis of open competition and merit be offered the 
relevant package, which the position carries. 
 
4.  
Ministries/Divisions are requested to follow the above instructions and 
also bring them to the notice of the Attached Departments, Subordinate Offices, 
Autonomous Bodies/Semi-Autonomous Bodies, Corporations Regulatory Authorities etc. 
under their administrative control for compliance. 
 
[Authority:– Establishment Division‘s No. 10/67/2004-R.2, dated 21st  June, 2005] 
 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 405 
 
 
 
11.2 
Submission of Panels for Nomination  
by the Prime Minister 
 
Refer the subject noted above and to state that the Prime Minister has observed 
that Ministries/Divisions while proposing names for certain positions requiring approval 
of the Prime Minister have not been proposing appropriately considered panels for 
selection. In some cases, single nomination are made, while in other, those recommended 
have no relevance to the job or organizations for which they are being proposed.  
2. 
The Prime Minister has desired that, in future, the Ministries/Divisions 
shall ensure the following:— 
 
i) 
A panel consisting of minimum three people shall be proposed for one 
position, without fail. Establishment and Cabinet Divisions shall not process 
any case for approval of the Prime Minister where panel consists of less 
than three nominations; and,  
ii) The Administrative Secretary concerned shall be responsible for ensuring 
 
that CV of the proposed person provides adequate justification for his 
 
nomination for that assignment.  
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M No. 52/02/2016-E-1, dated 22-09-2016]. 
 
11.3 Guidelines for Appointment of Consultants 
 
Consequent upon the findings of various Committees appointed during 2001 to 
examine the appointments of consultants and deliberations of the Conference held on 13 
November, 2001, under the Chairmanship of the COS to the Chief Executive, the competent 
authority was pleased to direct, inter alia, that guidelines regulating the appointment of 
consultants in all Ministries/Divisions and organizations under their administrative control, be 
framed/ circulated on the approved lines, for compliance by all the Ministries/ Divisions/ 
Organizations. Accordingly, a set of guidelines, in the succeeding paragraphs, is circulated for 
strict compliance, to ensure  that  the  best  persons  are transparently and competitively 
appointed in a cost-effective manner, only when a consciously and formally identified need 
for consultants exists. 
 
Determination of Need for Consultants: 
 
2. 
Need identification is a pre-requisite for any organization planning to 
obtain services of consultants, who are normally required to tender advice, being 
experts/specialists, on specific (generally technical) issues/projects to: 
(a) 
Address on uncommon problems; 
(b) 
Provide technical supervisions; or 
(c) 
Introduce innovative practices/solutions 
 
Consultancies would generally fall into two broad categories: 
(i) Project Consultancy– to provide technical support/ supervision by filling 
vacuum of technical expertise, specific to the project and funded out of 

Page - 406                     ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-04 
 
 
development funds; and 
(ii) General/Management Consultancy– to provide expert advice, unavailable 
in-house, to introduce innovative solutions to financial/human resources 
management/ technical issues or to act as agents of change for status-quo 
oriented permanent employees and commonly paid for out of non-
development budget. 
 
A consultancy would, therefore, always be assignment specific and time bound 
and should be preferred only when it is considered value effective to hire services of a 
consultant compared to developing in-house expertise. 
 
3. 
As a first step, the client organization is required to ascertain as to whether 
or not the required expertise is available within the organization/ government. In case the 
expertise is available in-house, reasons for not undertaking the assignment internally may 
be spelled out and detailed justification, including the following, may be given for hiring 
the consultant: – 
(i) 
Terms of reference/specific tasks to be accomplished by the consultant. 
(ii) 
Details of the outputs required of the consultant. 
(iii) Anticipated benefits from the proposed assignment. 
(iv) Professional expertise and experience required for the task to be 
undertaken. 
(v) 
Approximate time required for completion of the job. 
(vi) Cost estimates. 
 
The above information shall be placed for concept clearance before: 
(a) 
A committee headed by the Secretary of the Ministry/ Division 
concerned and including representative of Finance Division, 
Establishment Division and the Planning & Development Division 
for non-development budget-funded consultancy; or 
(b) 
The appropriate approval forum for development budget related 
consultancies. 
 
Procedure for Hiring Consultants: 
 
4. 
After concept clearance has been received, the following procedure will be 
pursued by the client Ministry/Division/Department/ Organization: 
(i) 
Consultancy should be widely advertised indicating the requirements 
mentioned at para-3 above. 
(ii) 
Advertisement of consultancy will indicate the range of compensation 
package, including various facilities, depending on the nature of work 
involved. The applicants will be short-listed and prioritized by an in-house 
Committee of the client organization. 
(iii) For general/non-development budget funded consultancies, a Selection Board, 
headed by the Secretary of the Ministry/Division concerned and including a 
representative each of Establishment Division and Finance Division, will 
recommend a panel of at least three candidates in order of merit for 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 407 
 
 
consideration of the appointing authority. The Selection Board should also 
recommend the compensation package for the consultants placed on the panel. 
(iv) For development budget/project related consultancies a competent 
Selection Board of the client organization, including a representative of the 
Planning & Development Division, shall recommend a panel of at least 
three names to the appropriate approval forum. 
(v) 
Financial sanction for the appointment of a consultant on the terms and 
conditions recommended by the Selection Board should be obtained from the 
competent authority. 
 
Final Approval: 
 
5. 
Final approval will be accorded as follows: 
(i) 
Development project-related consultancies will be approved by the 
competent approval forum and additional conditionalities of donors will 
be observed in grant funded consultancies. 
(ii) 
General/non-development budget funded consultancies will be approved 
by the Chief Executive, on proposals routed through the Establishment 
Division. 
 
Contracting Procedure: 
 
6. 
While making an offer of appointment, the following will be provided in 
the contract/agreement:– 
(i) 
Statement of objectives of the assignment. 
(ii) 
Responsibilities of the consultant stating particulars of the outputs 
required of him. 
(iii) Responsibilities of the client indicating types of inputs to be provided to 
the consultant. 
(iv) Duration of the contract indicating completion dates/ termination of 
contract. 
(v) 
Financial provisions reflecting manner of payment of remuneration etc. 
(vi) General provisions regarding matters like earlier termination of contract. 
(vii) Mode of periodic performance appraisal of the consultant. 
 
Others: 
 
7. 
Following further guidelines will also be kept in view while appointing 
consultants:– 
(i) 
No person retired from a government organization will be hired as a 
consultant only to re-employ him/her. 
(ii) 
Consultants should not be appointed to perform routine functions of an 
organization. 

Page - 408                     ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-04 
 
 
(iii) Special attention should be given by the Divisions/ Organizations to train 
and develop their own personnel to take up higher responsibilities. 
(iv) An objective evaluation and assessment of a consultant‘s performance 
should invariably be undertaken on a periodic basis in a manner especially 
designed for the job. 
 
8. 
In addition to the above, following further guidelines will also be strictly 
complied with:– 
(i) 
Engagement of retired officers as Consultants/Advisers etc. shall require 
prior permission of the government, invariably i.e.  
(ii) 
Establishment Division in case of retired civilian officers;  
(iii) Defence Division in case of retired defence officers; and  
(iv) Law, Justice and Human Rights Division/Supreme Court/ High Courts in 
case of retired judiciary officers. 
(v) 
The 
Prime 
Minister‘s 
Inspection 
Commission 
shall 
conduct 
regular/periodical checks in order to monitor compliance of the guidelines; 
(vi) Any deviation/departure of the prescribed guidelines shall be dealt with 
seriously and the defaulting officer(s) shall be proceeded against, under 
E&D laws/rules. 
(vii) A uniform proforma be devised containing all essential particulars/details 
regarding appointment of a Consultant etc. for evaluation/rational decision 
making by the Selection Committee/ Board concerned and approving 
authority. 
 
9. 
Ministries/Divisions are requested to kindly comply with the above 
guidelines and also accordingly inform their related departments/ organizations for 
compliance. 
 
10. 
This issues with the convenience of the approval of the competent 
authority by the Prime Minister Secretariat. 
[Authority:– Establishment Division, M.S. Wing‘s U.O. No.11-3/2001-MSW-III, dated 25-1-2002]. 
 
11.4 
Guidelines for Appointment  
 
of Consultants – Designing  
 
of a Proforma 
 
 
In pursuance of para-8(ii) of the Guidelines for Appointment of Consultants, 
circulated vide Estt. Division‘s U.O. of even number dated 25.1.2002, a proforma 
containing essential particulars/details regarding appointment of consultants has been 
designed for uniform evaluation and rational decision making by the Selection Board and 
the appointing authority. 
 
2. 
It is, therefore, requested that information as per the enclosed proforma 
may invariably be placed before the Selection Board and the appointing authority. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division M.S Wing‘s U.O. No.11-3/2001-MSW-III, dated 12-2-2002]. 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 409 
 
 
 
PROFORMA FOR APPOINTMENT OF CONSULTANTS 
 
 
ESSENTIAL PARTICULARS/DETAILS TO BE PLACED BEFORE THE 
SELECTION COMMITTEE/BOARD AND APPROVING AUTHORITY 
PART – I 
(1) Name of the Ministry/Division/ 
Department hiring the Consultant 
_______________________ 
(2) Area of consultancy 
_______________________ 
(3) Duration of consultancy 
_______________________ 
(4) Date of clearance by the Concept 
Clearance Committee 
_______________________ 
(5) Date of advertisement (copy may be 
enclosed) 
_______________________ 
(6) Number of applications received for the 
position 
_______________________ 
(7) Number of Candidates short-listed 
(Prioritized list may be enclosed) 
_______________________ 
 
PART – II 
(1) 
Justification for hiring the consultant on basis of need assessment. 
(2) 
Terms of reference (TOR) of the assignment. 
(3) 
Major activities to be performed under the TOR with date of completion in 
respect of each activity. 
(4) 
Qualifications, professional experience and other specifications considered 
necessary for the job. 
(5) 
Cost of hiring the consultant: 
(a) 
Remuneration to be paid to the consultant. 
(b) 
Cost of supporting staff. 
(c) 
Cost of equipment/material. 
(d) 
Others. 
                                                          
 Para 4(ii) of the Guidelines for Appointment of Consultants refers. 

Page - 410                     ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-04 
 
 
(6) 
Anticipated benefits of the proposed consultancy including savings to the 
organization. 
PART – III 
(To be filled when the case is submitted for  
consideration of the appointing authority) 
(1) 
Names of candidates in order of merit, recommended by the Selection Board, 
broadly giving reasons for such selection. 
(2) 
Compensation package for the Consultants recommended by the Selection Board. 
PART – IV 
(1) 
A profile of each candidate, in case of individuals, and profiles of principals in 
case of a firm etc., covering the following, may be enclosed alongwith detailed CV: 
(a) 
Name of the candidate/principal 
(b) 
Age with date of birth 
(c) 
Qualification and experience relevant to the assignment 
(d) 
Other factors which support individual‘s/firm‘s suitability for the job 
(2) 
Draft contract agreement may be enclosed. 
(I) 
Candidates short listed when the case is submitted for consideration of the 
Selection Board. 
(II) Panel of candidates recommended by the Selection Board when the case is 
submitted for consideration of the appointing authority. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
May be revised/modified, if required, in the light of recommendations of the Selection Board when the case is 
submitted for consideration of the appointing authority. 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 411 
 
 
XI. 
UPGRADATION POLICY 
 
12.1 Upgradation of Posts and Procedure  
for Filling-up of Upgraded Posts 
 
Establishment Division has been receiving proposals for upgradation of posts with 
immediate effect and also for upgradation of their incumbents. It is clarified that upgradation 
of a post implies the abolition of the existing post and creation of a new post in the higher 
grade. Upgradation of a post does not mean automatic upgradation of its incumbent. 
Appointment to the upgraded post will have to be made in the manner prescribed for that 
post. If a post is upgraded with immediate effect, the incumbent would be left without any 
post (in his grade) until he is approved for appointment to higher grade. 
 
2. 
In view of the position explained above, all Ministries/Divisions are 
requested that while sanctioning upgradation of the existing posts, it should be clearly 
provided in the sanction letter that upgradation of the post would take effect from the date the 
post is filled by a person in the higher grade. This would ensure that until the existing 
incumbent is formally appointed to higher grade, the post and the incumbent would continue 
in lower grade. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.8/10/83-R.I, dated 6-3-1983]. 
 
12.2 Upgradation of Posts 
 
In continuation of Establishment Division‘s O.M. No. 8/130/91-R.I, dated 3rd 
December, 1991, it is stated that the President under sub-para ‗F‘ of para 3 of the 
Presidential directive No. 57/1/CMLA, dated 2nd August 1979 had, inter-alia, frozen 
upgradation of posts till further orders. Prior to this, the upgradation of posts used to be 
made with the approval of the Finance Division and Establishment Division. However, 
after the directive, all the cases of upgradation of posts are submitted to the Prime 
Minister for approval, in relaxation of the above Presidential directive with the 
concurrence of Finance Division and Establishment Division.  
 
2. 
It has come to the notice of the government that Ministries/ Divisions/ 
Departments etc. are upgrading the posts without the approval of the competent authority 
i.e. the Prime Minister and concurrence of the Finance Division (Regulations Wing) and 
Establishment Division. Similarly, the appointments against the upgraded posts are being 
made by the Ministries/Divisions/Departments etc. without going through the prescribed 
selection process or approval of the competent authority. It may be pointed out that the 
upgradation of posts does not mean automatic upgradation of the incumbents. The 
appointment against the upgraded post will have to be made in the manner prescribed in 
the recruitment rules for that post and with the approval of the competent authority. 
Therefore, upgradations of posts made by the Ministries/ Divisions/Departments etc. and 
appointment of their incumbents against such posts without going through the prescribed 
selection process or approval of the competent authority are irregular.  
 
3. 
In view of the above, Ministries/Divisions are requested not to make any 
upgradation without the concurrence of Finance Division (Regulations Wing) and 
Establishment Division and the approval of the Prime Minister. The upgradation of posts, 
made by the Ministries/ Divisions without this process, may be submitted for 
regularization etc. in the prescribed procedure and for approval of the competent 

Page - 412                     ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-04 
 
 
authority. The above position may also be brought to the notice of all Departments/ 
Autonomous/Semi-Autonomous Bodies/Corporations etc. under the administrative 
control of the Ministries/Divisions.  
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M No. 8/130/91-R.I, dated 12th May, 1992] 
 
12.3 Policy for Upgradation/Re-designation of Posts 
 
On a summary submitted recently to the* Chief Executive, he has been pleased to 
approve the policy for upgradation/re-designation of posts as indicated in the proceeding 
paragraphs. 
 
2.  
Henceforth, the upgradation of posts shall be considered in the following 
cases only: 
(a) 
When it is considered necessary to up-grade certain posts in order to 
rationalize the administrative structure of a Ministry/ Division or a 
Department to make it more effective or to bring about uniformity of pay 
scales of similar posts in different organizations. 
(b) 
Where the duties and responsibilities attached to a post have considerably 
increased. 
(c) 
Where pay scale of a post is considered grossly incommensurate with the 
qualifications and experience prescribed for appointment to that post. 
(d) 
Up-gradation of a post on personal basis may not be allowed except if any 
officer, already holding on regular basis a higher grade post, is posted against 
a post, carrying lower grade, due to exigencies of service. 
 
3.  
Subject to the observance of the parameters referred to in sub-paras (a) – (d) 
above, the future proposals for the up-gradation/re-designation of posts shall be processed as 
under:- 
(i) 
The cases for up-gradation/re-designation of the posts in BPS 1 to 19 will be 
decided by the Finance Division in consultation with the Establishment 
Division. However, the decision about the proposed up-gradation/re-
designation of posts in BPS 1 to 19 will be taken at the level of Secretary, 
Finance Division and the Secretary Establishment Division. 
(ii) 
Cases of up-gradation/re-designation of posts in BPS 20 and above will be 
submitted to the *Chief Executive for approval but after seeking the 
concurrence of Finance Division and the Establishment Division. 
 
4. 
** [When the competent authority approves the up-gradation of a post in the 
situations mentioned in sub-paras (a), (b) and (c) of para 2, appointment to the up-graded 
post should be made in accordance with the provisions of the Civil Servants (Appointment, 
Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973, and the specific rules which regulate appointment to the 
post.] 
                                                          
* Now Prime Minister. 
** Subs. and deleted vide Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.F.8/36/2000-R.I, dated 3-2-2001. 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 413 
 
 
 
5. 
The above instructions may please be noted by the Ministries/ Divisions for 
strict compliance. 
 
6. 
[   ]  
[Authority:– Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.F.8/36/2000-R.I, dated 20.01.2001]. 
 
 
12.4 Up-gradation of Ministerial Posts 
 
Refer to the subject noted above and to say that Ministries/Divisions of the 
Federal Government have sought different clarifications from Establishment Division. The 
matter has been examined and it is decided that consolidated reply shall be given to all. 
Therefore, the clarifications and the reply of Establishment Division on same are as under:— 
 
Clarifications 
Reply 
(i) 
The existing Assistant-In Charge 
have been granted BS-16 as one 
time dispensation and the posts are 
declared as dying cadre. After the 
retirement of existing Assistant in 
Charge who have been granted BS-
16 the posts become vacant, what 
will be the status/fate of these posts? 
(ii) 
Whether the facility of up-gradation 
is applicable only to the employees 
of Ministries/ Divisions or it is also 
applicable to employees of Attached 
Departments/Subordinate Offices.  
(iii) 
Whether required training shall be a 
pre-requisite to the up-gradation or 
otherwise.   
(iv) 
Will the officials on deputation also 
be up-graded at their place of 
present posting or they will be 
repatriated 
to 
their 
parent 
department for up-gradation.  
(v) 
The post of Assistant/UDC/LDC 
working on contract basis will also 
be up-graded or otherwise? 
 
(i) 
It 
is 
upto 
the 
administrative 
Ministry/Division to convert the same 
post in to the post of Assistant in 
consultation with Finance Division.  
(ii) The uniform Recruitment Rules of 
ministerial staff are applicable to all 
Ministries/Divisions/ Departments of 
the Federal Government. 
(iii) Training is mandatory in the event of 
promotion and initial appointment. 
For initial appointment after selection 
before completion of probation period 
and 
for 
promotion 
before 
consideration for promotion passing 
of prescribed training is mandatory.    
(iv) The officials on deputation also stand 
up-graded at their place of present 
posting.  
(v) 
Project staff / contract employees 
which have been appointed in the 
prescribed manner are also entitled to 
the benefits of this up-gradation, if it 
is not in conflict with their terms of 
appointment.   
  
 
  
 
                                                          
 Deleted vide Establishment Division‘s O.M. No. F.8/36/2000-R.I, dated 3-2-2001. 

Page - 414                     ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-04 
 
 
Clarifications 
Reply 
(vi) 
If a post has already been advertised 
in the newspapers without mention-
ing requisite basic IT training 
Course from NITB before receipt of 
Establishment Division‘s O.M in 
question dated 10-08-2016. Whether 
recruitment 
process 
may 
be 
completed in accordance with the 
existing Recruitment Rules or the 
post may be re-advertised in the 
newspapers?   
(vii) Whether, up-gradation of ministerial 
staff is applicable on autonomous 
bodies? 
 
(viii) Whether the higher scale BS-16 may 
also 
be 
granted 
to 
existing 
incumbents who are working against 
the post of Assistant on acting 
charge basis or otherwise. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ix) 
Whether for grant of BS-16 to 
Assistant will be notified or office 
order will be issued.   
(vi) Necessary 
corrigendum 
advertis-
ement may be issued.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
(vii) Autonomous Bodies may adopt the 
same decision in accordance with 
their respective Service Rules. 
(viii) Acting charge appointment is made to 
those officials who otherwise are 
eligible for promotion but do not 
possess the required length of service 
for promotion under Rule 8 B of Civil 
Servants (Appointment, Promotion & 
Transfer) Rules,1973. There-fore, the 
incumbent of the post of Assistant 
(BS-15) working on acting charge 
basis will be allowed grant of BS-16 
in due time after regularization to the 
post of Assistant (BS-15).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ix) Establishment Division‘s d.o letter 
No.1/1/73-ARC, dated 10-11-1973 
provides notifying of all appoint-
ments in BS-16 and above in the 
Gazette of Pakistan. Estt. Division 
vide its O.M No. 1/13/96-R-6, dated 
10-08-2016 has up-graded the post of 
Assistant to BS-15 and grant of BS-
16 is allowed to existing incumbents 
of the post. The substantive pay scale 
of the post of Assistant is BS-15 and 
BS-16 is only grant. Therefore, 
Office Order may be issued.    
[Authority:— Establishment Division‘s O.M No.7/6/2002-R-6(Pt-II) dated 11-01-2017]. 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 415 
 
 
 
12.5 Up-gradation of Ministerial Posts 
 
 
Refer to the above noted subject and to say that as earlier clarified by Estt. 
Division vide O.M No. 7/6/2002-R-6(Pt-II) dated 11-01-2017, the contractual employees 
appointed under the Prime Minister‘s Assistant Package from time to time are entitled for 
the benefits of up-gradation issued vide Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 1/13/96-R-6 
dated 10-08-2016. 
[Authority:— Establishment Division‘s O.M No.8/90/2016-E-2 dated 23-02-2018]. 
 
12.6 Appointment to Upgraded Posts 
 
Refer to the Establishment Division‘s O.M. No.8/36/2000-R-I dated 20-01-2001 
containing policy of upgradation/re-designation of posts and to state as under:— 
i) 
The instructions contained in Establishment Division‘s O.M.No. 
8/36/2000-R-I dated 20-01-2001 as amended on 03-02-2001 provide that 
when the competent authority approves the up-gradation of a post on 
regular basis, appointment to the upgraded post should be made in 
accordance with the provisions of the Civil Servants(Appointment, 
Promotion and Transfer) Rules,1973, and the specific rules which regulate 
appointment to the post. 
ii) 
The instructions contained in Establishment Division‘s O.M.No. 8/10/83-
R-I dated 06-03-1983 and O.M. No.8/130/91-R-I dated  12-05-1992 
provide that up-gradation of a post does not mean automatic up-gradation 
of its incumbent. Appointment to upgraded post will have to be made in 
the manner prescribed for that post. If a post is upgraded with immediate 
effect, the incumbent would be left without any post (in his grade) until he 
is approved for appointment to higher grade. Therefore, upgradation of 
posts made by the Ministries/Divisions/ Departments etc. and 
appointments of their incumbents against such posts without going 
through the prescribed selection process or approval of the competent 
authority, are irregular.    
 
2. 
It would be highly appreciated if the above mentioned instructions are 
complied with in letter and spirit in order to avoid administrative complications and future 
litigation. 
[Authority:- Estt. Div.‘s D.O.No.8/36/2000.R-I dated 31-12-2008] 
 
12.7 Upgradation of the posts of Stenotypist,  
Stenographer and Private Secretary 
 
Consequent upon approval of the Prime Minister of Pakistan, the posts of Private 
Secretaries, *Stenographers and Stenotypists have been upgraded with immediate effect, 
subject to fulfillment of the conditions mentioned against each. 
 
                                                          
 Stenographer re-designated as Assistant Private Secretary. 

Page - 416                     ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-04 
 
 
Sr. # 
Name of the Post 
Existing 
BS 
Upgraded 
BS 
Condition 
1. 
Private Secretary 
17 
- 
Will continue to remain in BS-17 and will be 
granted BS-18 after putting in 5 years 
satisfactory service instead of 7 years. The 
Private Secretaries in BS-18 will further be 
granted BS-19 after putting in 12 years 
service in BS-17 and above taking benefit of 
Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 1/9/80-R-
II dated 2-6-1983. However, on grant of BS-
19 nomenclature of the post will be Senior 
Private Secretary. 
The 
existing 
Private 
Secretaries 
in  
BS-17 will be granted BS-18 on one time 
basis, irrespective of their length of service in 
BS-17. 
2. 
*Stenographer 
15 
16 
With enhancement of qualification for initial 
appointment 
from 
intermediate 
to 
Graduation.  
3. 
Stenotypist 
12 
14 
With enhancement of qualification for initial 
appointment 
from 
Matriculation 
to 
Intermediate.  
 
 
The incumbents of the upgraded posts will also stand upgraded and their pay will 
be fixed at the stage next above their basic pay in their lower pay scale. 
 
2. 
The Establishment Division will amend the recruitment rules of the above 
said posts, accordingly.  
[Authority:– Finance. Div.‘s O.M.No.F.19(55)Legal-II/2010-1055 , dated 23-12-2011]. 
 
12.8 Re-designation of the post of  
Stenographer (BS-16) as Assistant  
Private Secretary (BS-16) 
 
In exercise of the power conferred by sub-rule(2) of rule 3 of the Civil Servants 
(Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973, the following amendment shall be 
made in the Recruitment Rules of Establishment Division notified vide SRO. 526(I)/2012, 
dated 18th April 2012, namely: 
 
In the aforesaid Recruitment Rules, 
 
The brackets/words/figures ―Stenographer (BPS-16)‖, where occurring shall be 
substituted with the brackets/words/figures ―Assistant Private Secretary BPS-16)‖. 
 
2. 
This Notification issued with the approval of Establishment Division vide 
O.M No. 7/6/2002-R-6 (Pt-I), dated 09-04-2013 and FPSC vide letter No. F. 12-04-2012-RR 
dated 23rd July, 2013. 
[Authority:- Estt. Division‘s S.R.O. 785(I)/2013, dated 23-07-2013] 
 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 417 
 
 
 
12.9 Upgradation/Re-designation of the Post 
 
Refer to Establishment Division‘s O.M No.8/36/2000-R-I dated 20-01-2001 and 
03-02-2001 on the above subject and D.O. No.8/36/2000-R-I dated 31-12-2008 regarding 
policy of upgradation/re-designation of posts and to state that Establishment Division 
examines/ considers the proposals concerning upgradation/re-designation of the posts in the 
Federal Ministries/Divisions/Attached Departments received from respective Ministries/ 
Divisions in the light of aforementioned policy.  
2. 
The Honorable Supreme Court of Pakistan in Civil Appeals No. 101 & 102-P 
of 2011 has ordered as under:— 
 
―The upgradation cannot be made to benefit a particular individual in term 
of promoting him to a higher post and further providing him with the avenues of 
lateral appointment or transfer or posting. In order to justify the upgradation, the 
Government is required to establish that the department needs re-structuring, 
reform or to meet the exigency of service in the public interest. In the absence of 
these pre-conditions, upgradation is not permissible.   
 
3. 
Subsequent to Apex Court‘s judgment, Finance Division vide their U.O No. 
9(121) R-1/2016-236 dated 19-04-2017 stated that:— 
 
―Establishment Division is requested to look in to the service structure as a 
whole of Federal Government keeping in view of the Judgment dated 17-02-2016 of 
the Supreme Court of Pakistan in consultation with M.S Wing to remove the 
anomaly/distortion created due to up-gradation of posts and submit 
recommendations for approval of the Prime Minister‖ 
 
4. 
In view of the above, all Ministries/Divisions are advised to refer the 
proposals for upgradation/re-designation of post(s) to Establishment Division in the light of 
paras 1-2 above alongwith specific recommendations of Management Services Wing of the 
Establishment Division/administrative Ministry/Division on upgradation/re-designation of 
post(s) for consideration under policy of upgradation/re-designation of posts.  
[Authority:- Estt. Division‘s O.M No. 8/36/2000-R-I dated 11-09-2018]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page - 418                     ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-04 
 
 
XII. 
PRIME MINISTER’S ASSISTANCE PACKAGE 
13.1 Assistance Package for Families of  
Government Employees Who Die in Service 
 
The approval of Prime Minister of Pakistan to the following assistance package 
for government employees who die in service:— 
 
Item 
In Service Death 
Security Related Death 
Lump Sum Grant 
Upto Rs. 1.0 million, according to 
following scales:- 
BS 
Amount 
(Rs.) 
1-4 
200,000 
5-10 
300,000 
11-15 
400,000 
16-17 
500,000 
18-19 
800,000 
20 & above 
1,000,000 
 
 
BS 
Amount 
(Rs.) 
1-5 
500,000 
16-19 
1,000,000 
20 & above 
1,500,000 
 
Pension 
75% pension to the spouse or eldest son 
till the youngest child attains the age of 
18 years. 
Normal pension to the spouse after that 
for life. 
Full pension to the spouse or eldest 
son till the youngest child attains 
the age of 18 years. 
Normal pension to the spouse after 
that for life. 
Accommodation 
Retention of government house or 
payment of rent for hired house for 05 
years or till the age of superannuation, 
whichever is earlier, but for a minimum 
period of 03 years. 
Retention of government house or 
payment of rent for hired house till 
superannuation or for 05 years 
whichever is later. 
Employment 
[Employment for posts in BS-01 to BS-
15 
on 
five 
(05) 
years 
contract 
appointment 
without 
advertisement 
which may further be extendable till the 
age of superannuation or regularization as 
the case may be.] 
*[Employment for posts in BS-01 to 
BS-15 on five (05) years contract 
appointment without advertisement 
which may further be extendable till 
the 
age 
of 
superannuation 
or 
regularization as the case may be.] 
Education 
Free education to one child up to the age 
of 18 years. 
Free education to all the children up 
to the age of 18 years. 
Health 
Free health facilities to widow for life 
and for children upto age of 18 years in 
government hospitals. 
Free health facilities to widow for 
children upto to age of 18 years in 
government hospitals. 
Plot of Land 
Allotment of a plot as per **FGEHF 
policy against 2% quota fixed for 
deceased employees. 
The widow would also be eligible to be 
considered for allotment of plot as per 
**FGEHF policy applicable to serving 
Federal Government employees. However, 
allotment of plot against one category 
would 
render 
her 
ineligible 
for 
consideration in second category. 
Allotment of a plot as per **FGEHF 
policy against 2% quota fixed for 
deceased employees. 
The widow would also be eligible to 
be considered for allotment of plot 
as per **FGEHF policy applicable 
to serving Federal Government 
employees. However, allotment of 
plot against one category would 
render 
her 
ineligible 
for 
consideration in second category. 
                                                          
 Amended vide Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 8/65/2016-E-2 dated 21-05-2018. 
** Federal Government Employees Housing Foundation. 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 419 
 
 
Item 
In Service Death 
Security Related Death 
House 
Building 
Advance 
In case of advance against salaries 
sanctioned by the AGPR or the provincial 
AG Office, the unpaid balance to be 
waived. 
In case of advance against salaries 
sanctioned by the AGPR or the 
provincial AG Office, the unpaid 
balance to be waived. 
 
2. 
All Ministries/Divisions are requested to take further necessary action in 
the matter accordingly. 
[Authority:- Establishment  Div.‘s O.M No. 7/40/2005-E.2, dated the 13th June, 2006]. 
 
13.2 Assistance Package for Families of  
Government Employees Who Die in Service 
In continuation of Establishment Division‘s O.M. No.7/40/2005-E-2 dated  
13-06-2006, amended from time to time, on the above noted subject, the Prime Minister 
has now been pleased to approve the following amendments/ additions, effective from 
15-06-2013, in the existing Assistance Package for families of Government Employees 
who die in service:— 
 
Item 
In Service Deaths 
Security Related Deaths 
Lump 
Sum 
Grant 
Upto Rs.9 million according to 
following scales:— 
 
BS  
Amount 
1-16 
2.5 Million 
17 
4 Million 
18-19 
8 Million 
 20 & above 
9 Million 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
a. 
Upto Rs.10 million according to 
following scales:— 
 
BS  
Amount 
1-16 
3 Million 
17 
5 Million 
18-19 
9 Million 
 20 & above 
10 Million 
 
b. 
Rs.700,000/- to the officers/ officials 
incapacitated and released from service for 
having become invalid as a result of injury 
in encounters/bomb blasts, riots/watch and 
ward duty or terrorist  activity.    
c. 
Rs.500,000/- to the officers/officials 
incapacitated as a result of the injury in 
accidents as stated in para ―b‖ above but 
who are still serving in the department.  
Pension 
Full pay and allowances to the 
families of government servant till 
the date of superannuation, with 
increments and full benefits of the 
revised rates of all pay and 
allowances, special/Adhoc relief 
etc., as allowed by the government 
from time to time. 
On 
attaining 
the 
age 
of 
superannuation, his/her spouse shall 
be entitled to full pension as per 
rules 
governing 
superannuation 
officials.  
 
Education  
Free education to all the children of 
the 
deceased 
government 
Free education to all the children of the 
deceased 
government 
employees 
upto 

Page - 420                     ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-04 
 
 
employees upto higher education 
level including expenses of children 
on account of tuition Fee, Books 
and 
related 
material, 
living 
allowances etc.  
higher education level including expenses of 
children on account of tuition Fee, Books 
and related material, living allowances etc.  
Cash 
payment 
in 
lieu of plot 
of land 
BS 
Amount 
1-8 
2 Million 
9-16 
5 Million 
17 and above 
7 Million 
BS 
Amount 
1-8 
2 Million 
9-16 
5 Million 
17 and above 
7 Million 
Employment  
Employment of widow/widower, 
one son or daughter to the posts 
in BS-01 to BS-15, on regular 
basis 
without 
advertisement 
against the post criteria of which 
the applicant fulfills.   
Employment of widow/ widower, one son 
or daughter to the posts in BS-01 to BS-
15, on regular basis without advertisement 
against the post criteria of which the 
applicant fulfills.   
Marriage 
Grant 
Marriage grant amounting to 
Rs.0.80 million, on wedding of 
one daughter. 
Marriage grant amounting to Rs.0.80 
million, on wedding of one daughter. 
Nomination 
of an officer 
as counsel 
An officer of BS-17 or BS-18, to 
be nominated by each Ministry/ 
Division/ Department as counsel, 
will be responsible for finaliza-
tion/ provision of all the facilities 
under the package, to the families 
of Govt. employees who die in 
service, within one month of the 
incident.     
An officer of BS-17 or BS-18, to be 
nominated by each Ministry/ Division/ 
Department 
as 
counsel, 
will 
be 
responsible for finalization/ provision of 
all the facilities under the package, to the 
families of Govt. employees who die in 
service, within one month of the incident.     
Special 
Lump 
Sum 
Grant 
from 
Benevolent 
Fund 
  
A 
special 
lump 
sum 
grant 
from 
Benevolent 
Fund 
ranging 
from 
Rs.200,000 
to 
Rs.500,000 
as 
per 
following scales:— 
S. 
No. 
Pay Scales 
(BS) 
Lump Sum 
Grant (Rs) 
1. 
1-10 
200,000 
2. 
11-16 
300,000 
3. 
17-19 
400,000  
4. 
20 and above 
500,000 
Monthly 
Benevolent 
Grant 
 
 
S. 
No. 
PAY Slabs 
Amount 
Minimum Maximum 
1 
Upto 
5,000 
8,000 
2 
5001 
5,500 
8,300 
3 
5501 
6,000 
8,600 
4 
6001 
6,500 
8,900 
5 
6501 
7,000 
9,200 
6 
7001 
7,500 
9,500 
7 
7501 
8,000 
9,800 
8 
8001 
8,500 
10,100 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 421 
 
 
9 
8501 
9,000 
10,400 
10 
9001 
9,500 
10,700 
11 
9501 
11,000 
11,200 
12 
11001 
13,000 
11,800 
13 
13001 
15,000 
12,400 
14 
15001 
17,000 
13,000 
15 
17001 
19,000 
13,600 
16 
19001 
21,000 
14,200 
17 
21001 
23,000 
14,800 
18 
23001 
25,000 
15,400 
19 
25001 
27,000 
16,000 
20 
27001 
29,000 
16,600 
21 
29001 
31,000 
17,200 
22 
31001 
33,000 
17,800 
23 
33001 
35,000 
18,400 
24 
35001 
37,000 
19,000 
25 
37001 
39,000 
19,600 
26 
39001 & 
above 
 
20,200 
Pre requisite 
for 
facilitation 
of family of 
deceased 
Govt. 
Employees 
In case of in service death 
(normal) 
of 
a 
government 
employee, the following pre-
requisite must immediately be 
fulfilled 
by 
the 
concerned 
Ministry/ Division/ Department 
so that the family of the deceased 
government employee could be 
facilitated without any delay:— 
a. Immediate 
submission 
of 
family pension case. 
b. Option form for Direct Credit 
Scheme (online payment of 
pension).  
c. Application for Anticipatory 
Pension (80% of the total 
pension). 
Besides, as a pro-active approach, 
each Ministry/Division/Department 
must 
observe 
the 
following 
practices 
regarding 
their 
employees:— 
d. Up to date list of family 
In case of in service death (normal) of a 
government employee, the following pre-
requisite must immediately be fulfilled by 
the 
concerned 
Ministry/Division/ 
Department so that the family of the 
deceased government employee could be 
facilitated without any delay:— 
a. Immediate 
submission 
of 
family 
 pension case. 
b. Option form for Direct Credit Scheme 
(online payment of pension).  
c. Application for Anticipatory Pension 
(80% of the total pension). 
Besides, as a pro-active approach, each 
Ministry/Division/Department 
must 
observe the following practices regarding 
their employees:— 
d. Up to date list of family members of 
each employee for pension purpose be 
maintained before hand.  
e. Nomination for General Provident 
Fund must be ensured for each 

Page - 422                     ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-04 
 
 
members of each employee 
for 
pension 
purpose 
be 
maintained before hand.  
e. Nomination 
for 
General 
Provident 
Fund 
must 
be 
ensured for each employee 
during his/her life time.  
employee during his/her life time. 
GP Fund  
In case of in service death, the 
assistance package in terms of GP 
Fund shall be as follows:— 
 BPS 1-3= Payable amount + 
50% Bonus. 
 BPS 4-22= Payable amount + 
30% Bonus. 
 Fixation of pay of each 
employee 
on 
timely 
and 
regular basis.  
 Service verification on regular 
basis.  
 Upto date Service Statement.  
 Maintaining leave account on 
regular basis.  
 Updating 
employee 
record 
through change in SAP of 
AGPR.  
In case of in service death, the assistance 
package in terms of GP Fund shall be as 
follows:— 
 BPS 1-3= Payable amount + 50% 
Bonus. 
  BPS 4-22= Payable amount + 30% 
Bonus. 
 Fixation of pay of each employee on 
timely and regular basis.  
 Service verification on regular basis.  
 Upto date Service Statement.  
 Maintaining leave account on regular 
basis.  
 Updating employee record through 
change in SAP of AGPR. 
Payment 
of 
Pension 
through 
Direct Credit 
Scheme 
(DCS) 
The following steps shall be 
taken by the concerned Ministries 
/Divisions/Departments 
for 
payment 
of 
pension 
through 
Direct Credit Scheme (DCS) 
(optional):—   
a. The Direct Credit Scheme 
must be made compulsory for 
all 
new 
pensioners/family 
pensioners w.e.f. 01-01-2015. 
b. The 
manual 
both 
halves 
would be discontinued w.e.f. 
01-01-2015 
for 
all 
new 
pensioners/family 
pension-
ers.  
c. The historical pensioners must 
be brought into the stream of 
DCS, phase-wise.   
The following steps shall be taken by the 
concerned 
Ministries/Divisions/ 
Departments for payment of pension 
through Direct Credit Scheme (DCS) 
(optional):—   
a. The Direct Credit Scheme must be 
made 
compulsory 
for 
all 
new 
pensioners/family pensioners w.e.f. 
01-01-2015. 
b. The manual both halves would be 
discontinued w.e.f. 01-01-2015 for all 
new pensioners/family pensioners.  
The historical pensioners must be brought 
into the stream of DCS, phase-wise.   
 
2. 
A list of other existing provisions remaining unchanged is also annexed 
information and referencing.  
[Authority:— Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 8/10/2013-E.2 dated 20-10-2014]. 
          

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 423 
 
 
  Annexure to 
           Establishment Division’s O.M No. 8/10/201-E-2 
           dated 20th October,2014 
 
LIST OF OTHER EXISTING PROVISIONS OF PRIME MINISTER’S ASSISTANCE 
PACKAGE REMAINING UNCHANGED 
 
Item 
In Service Deaths 
Security related Deaths 
Pension 
 
Upon embracing Shahdat, salary of such 
Government employees which they were 
drawing immediately before Shahadat 
may continue to be paid un-interrupted, 
along-with usual allowance and annual 
increments 
from 
time 
to 
time, 
commensurate to their pay scales, 
alongwith full pensionary benefits, to 
their 
widows/widowers/children 
till 
superannuation (Establishment Div.‘s 
O.M No. 7/40/2005-E-2 dated 29th 
August, 2014).    
Plot of Land 
Allotment of a plot as per FGEHF policy against 
2% quota fixed for deceased employees. The 
widow would also be eligible to be considered for 
allotment of plot as per FGEHF policy applicable 
to serving Federal Government employees. 
However, allotment of plot against one category 
would render her ineligible for consideration in 
second category. (Establishment Division O.M. 
No. 7/40/2005-E-2 dated 13th June, 2006). 
Allotment of a plot as per FGEHF 
policy against 2% quota fixed for 
deceased employees. 
The widow would also be eligible to be 
considered for allotment of plot as per 
FGEHF policy applicable to serving 
Federal 
Government 
employees. 
However, allotment of plot against one 
category would render her ineligible for 
consideration 
in 
second 
category. 
(Establishment 
Division 
O.M. 
No. 
7/40/2005-E-2 dated 13th June, 2006). 
Waiver of Unpaid 
Amount 
of 
Plot 
Allotted by FGEHF 
The balance amount of plot allotted by FGEHF, in 
cases where both husband and wife have expired 
and their dependents are unable to pay the cost of 
the plot, shall be paid by the Government  
(Establishment Division O.M. No. 7/40/2005-E-2 
(part 2) dated 15th March, 2008). 
The balance amount of plot allotted by 
FGEHF, in cases where both husband 
and wife have expired and their 
dependents are unable to pay the cost of 
the 
plot, 
shall 
be 
paid 
by 
the 
Government. (Establishment Division 
O.M. No. 7/40/2005-E-2 (part 2) dated 
15th March, 2008). 
House 
Building 
Advance 
In case of advance against salaries sanctioned by 
the AGPR or the provincial AG office, the unpaid 
balance to be waived off. (Establishment Division 
O.M. No. 7/40/2005-E-2 dated 13th June, 2006). 
In case of advance against salaries 
sanctioned by the AGPR or the 
provincial AG office, the unpaid balance 
to 
be 
waived 
off. 
(Establishment 
Division O.M. No. 7/40/2005-E-2 dated 
13th June, 2006). 
Motor Car, Motor 
cycle and Bicycle 
advances  
The waiver of balance amount of Motor Car, 
Motor Cycle and Bicycle advances which the 
deceased employees secured while they were in 
service. (Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 8/1/2011-E-2, 
dated 3rd November,  2011) 
The waiver of balance amount of Motor 
Car, Motor Cycle and Bicycle advances 
which the deceased employees secured 
while they were in service. (Estt. 
Division‘s O.M. No. 8/1/2011-E-2, 
dated 3rd November,  2011) 

Page - 424                     ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-04 
 
 
Item 
In Service Deaths 
Security related Deaths 
Accommodation 
 
Retention of Government house or 
payment of rent for hired house till 
superannuation or for 5 years whichever 
is later. (Establishment Division O.M. 
No. 7/40/2005-E-2 dated 13th June, 
2006). 
Motor Car, Motor 
cycle and Bicycle 
advances  
Car, Motor Cycle and Bicycle advances which the 
deceased employees secured while they were in 
service. (Establishment Division‘s O.M. No. 
8/1/2011-E-2, dated 3rd November,  2011). 
 Car, Motor Cycle and Bicycle advances 
which the deceased employees secured 
while they were in service. (Establish-
ment Division‘s O.M. No. 8/1/2011-E-2, 
dated 3rd November,  2011.) 
Accommodation 
 
Retention of Government house or 
payment of rent for hired house till 
superannuation or for 5 years whichever 
is later. (Establishment Division O.M. 
No.7/40/2005-E-2 
dated 
13th 
June, 
2006). 
Health 
Free health facilities to widow for life and for 
children upto age of 18 years in Government 
hospitals. (Establishment Division O.M. No. 
7/40/2005-E-2 dated 13th June, 2006). 
Free health facilities to widow for life 
and for children upto age of 8 years in 
Government hospitals. (Establishment 
Division O.M. No. 7/40/2005-E-2 dated 
13th June, 2006). 
Monthly 
Benevolent Grant 
S. 
No. 
Pay Slabs 
Grant 
Minimum 
Maximum  
1 
Upto 
5,000 
4,000 
2 
5,001 
5,500 
4,150 
3 
5,501 
6,000 
4,300 
4 
6,001 
6,500 
4,450 
5 
6,501 
7,000 
4,600 
6 
7,001 
7,500 
4,750 
7 
7,501 
8,000 
4,900 
8 
8,001 
8,500 
5,050 
9 
8,501 
9,000 
5,200 
10 
9,001 
9,500 
5,350 
11 
9,501 
11,000 
5,600 
12 
11,001 
13,000 
5,900 
13 
13,001 
15,000 
6,200 
14 
15,001 
17,000 
6,500 
15 
17,001 
19,000 
6,800 
16 
19,001 
21,000 
7,100 
17 
21,001 
23,000 
7,400 
18 
23,001 
25,000 
7,700 
19 
25,001 
27,000 
8,000 
20 
27,001 
29,000 
8,300 
21 
29,001 
31,000 
8,600 
22 
31,001 
33,000 
8,900 
23 
33,001 
35,000 
9,200 
24 
35,001 
37,000 
9,500 
25 
37,001 
39,000 
9,800 
26 
39,001 
& 
Above 
 
10,100 
 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 425 
 
 
13.3 Assistance Package for Families of  
Government Employees who Die in Service  
In partial modification of Establishment Division‘s O.M of even number dated 
20-10-2014 on the above subject and to say that the Prime Minister has also been please 
to approve the following amendment/addition, effective from 15-06-2013, in the existing 
Assistance Package for families of Government Employees who die in service:— 
Item 
In Service Death 
Security Related Deaths 
Accommodation 
Retention of Government house 
or payment of rent for hired 
house for 05 (five) years or till 
the age of superannuation which 
ever is later.  
 
  
[Authority:— Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 8/10/2013-E-2 dated 22-10-2014]. 
13.4 Assistance Package for Families of Government 
Employees who Die in Service 
Refer to the subject noted above and to say that the Prime Minister has been 
pleased to constitute a Committee under the chairmanship of Secretary Finance to re-
examine the policy of death benefits.  
2. 
Till such time the report of the Committee is finalized, the death benefits 
notified vide Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 8/10/2013-E.2 dated 20-10-2014, shall 
remain held in abeyance.  
[Authority:— Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 8/10/2013-E-2 dated 09-02-2015]. 
13.5 Assistance Package for Families of Government 
Employees who Die in Service 
Refer the subject cited above and to state that references/quarries on following 
aspects of Prime Minister‘s Assistance Package are often received in Establishment Division: 
i. 
Whether the services of contract employees appointed under the said 
package can be regularized? if so, under what rules? 
ii. 
Whether, on expiry of their term, the contract of employees, appointed 
under the said package, can be extended? If so, under what rules? 
iii. 
Whether, upon holding in abeyance of the revised package issued vide 
Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 8/10/2013-E-2 dated 20-10-2014 what 
is the status of benefits to be granted to the widows/children of deceased 
Government Servants. 
 
2. 
Aforesaid queries are clarified as under for general information of all 
concerned, 
 
i. 
Regularization of services of employees appointed on contract basis are 
governed by Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion & Transfer) Rules, 
1973. 

Page - 426                     ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-04 
 
 
 
ii. 
Extension in contract appointments is governed by instructions contained 
in Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 8/10/2000-CP-I dated 23-12-2000.  
 
iii. 
Revision made to the subject Package vide Establishment Division‘s O.M 
No. 8/10/2013-E-2 dated 20-10-2014 has since been held in abeyance, 
therefore, all cases are to be dealt under Establishment Division‘s O.M 
No. 8/10/2013-E-2 dated 13-06-2006, till further orders/instructions.  
[Authority:— Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 8/10/2013-(E-II) dated 25-05-2015]. 
  
13.6 Revision of Assistance Package for Families of  
Government Employees Who Die in Service 
Refer to Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 7/40/2005-E-2, dated 13th 
June,2006, O.M No.8/10/2013-E-2, dated 20th October, 2014, O.M No. 8/10/ 2013-E-2 
dated 9th February,2015 and O.M No. 8/10/2013 (E-II) (PT) dated 25th May,2015 
including amendments thereof issued from time to time on the subject noted above and to 
state that the Prime Minister has been pleased to approve the following revised Assista-
nce Package for Government employees, who die in service w.e.f 9th February,2015:— 
 
ITEM 
IN SERVICE DEATHS 
SECURITY RELATED 
DEATHS 
Lump Sum Grant 
300% increase over the package-
2006 for in service death of civilian 
employees. This increase will be 
given on the 2006 package as per 
following scales:— 
 
BS 
Amount 
1-4 
Rs.600,000 
5-10 
Rs.900,000 
11-15 
Rs.1,200,000 
16-17 
Rs.1,500,000 
18-19 
Rs.2,400,000 
20 & above 
Rs.3,000,000 
 
 
a. Upto Rs.10 million according to 
following scales:— 
BS 
Amount 
1-16 
3 Million 
17 
5 Million 
18-19 
9 Million 
20 & above 
   10 Million 
 
b. Rs.700,000/- to the officers/ 
officials incapacitated and released 
from  service for having become 
invalid as a result of injury in 
encounters/bomb blasts, riots/ watch 
and ward duty or terrorist activity. 
c. Rs. 500,000/- to the officers / 
officials incapacitated as a result of 
the injury in accidents as stated in 
para ―b‖ above but who are still 
serving in the department.  
Pension 
100% pension to the families of a 
deceased Government servants as 
per their length of service and last 
pay drawn. In case of less than 10 
years service of the deceased 
employees, rate of minimum 10 
years service will be applicable. 
100% pension to the families of a 
deceased Government servants as 
per their length of service and last 
pay drawn. In case of less than 10 
years 
service 
of 
the 
deceased 
employees, rate of minimum 10 
years service will be applicable. 
Accommodation 
Retention of Government house or 
payment of rent of hired house till 
the age of superannuation.  
Retention of Government house or 
payment of rent of hired house till 
the age of superannuation.  
 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 427 
 
 
ITEM 
IN SERVICE DEATHS 
SECURITY RELATED 
DEATHS 
Education 
Free education to all the children of 
the deceased government employ-
ees up to graduation in any public/ 
government educational institution 
including expenses of tuition fee, 
books related material and living 
allowances etc. 
Free education to all the children of 
the deceased government employees 
up to graduation in any public/ 
government  educational institution 
including expenses of tuition fee, 
books related material and living 
allowances etc. 
Allotment of Plot 
Discontinuation of the entitlement 
of 2% quota for allotment of plot. 
Payment of lump sum grant in lieu 
of plot subject to the condition that 
no plot had been allotted in the 
past, as per scale given below:— 
 
BS 
Amount 
1-8 
2 Million 
9-16 
5 Million 
17 and above 
7Million 
 
Discontinuation of the entitlement of 
2% quota for allotment of plot. 
Payment of lump sum grant in lieu 
of plot subject to the condition that 
no plot had been allotted in the past, 
as per scale given below:— 
 
BS 
Amount 
1-8 
2 Million 
9-16 
5 Million 
17 and above 
7Million 
 
Employment 
[Employment for posts in BS-01 
to BS-15 on five (05) years 
contract 
appointment 
without 
advertisement which may further 
be extendable till the age of 
superannuation or regularization as 
the case may be]. 
**[Provided further that in case the 
deceased government servant is 
survived by two or more widows 
and/or children from these widows, 
right of contract appointment shall 
be decided in the following manner 
and order: 
a) the first widow or a child (18 
years or above in age) from the 
first widow or a minor child 
from the first widow as soon 
as he/she attains age of 18 
years 
but 
he/she 
has 
to 
exercise the option within the 
time period (one year from 
date of death) stipulated vide 
Establishment Division‘s O.M 
No. 
4/1/2005-CP-I 
dated  
13-04-2005 and failing that: 
*[Employment for posts in BS-01 to 
BS-15 on five (05) years contract 
appointment  without advertisement 
which may further be extendable till 
the 
age 
of 
superannuation 
or 
regularization as the case may be]. 
**[Provided further that in case the 
deceased government servant is 
survived by two or more widows 
and/or children from these widows, 
right of contract appointment shall 
be decided in the following manner 
and order: 
 
a) the first widow or a child (18 
years or above in age) from the 
first widow or a minor child 
from the first widow as soon as 
he/she attains age of 18 years 
but he/she has to exercise the 
option within the time period 
(one year from date of death) 
stipulated vide Establishment 
Division‘s O.M No.4/1/2005-
CP-I dated 13-04-2005 and 
failing that: 
                                                          
Amended vide Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 8/65/2016-E-2 dated 09-09-2016. 
** Added vide Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 1/39/2013-E-2 (pt) dated 03-08-2016. 

Page - 428                     ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-04 
 
 
ITEM 
IN SERVICE DEATHS 
SECURITY RELATED 
DEATHS 
the right to contract appointment 
shall stand transferred to the 2nd 
widow or to a child (18 years or 
above in age) from the 2nd widow 
or to a child (18 years or above in 
age) from the 2nd widow or a minor 
child from the 2nd widow as soon 
as he/she attains age of 18 years 
but he/she has to exercise the 
option within two years of death.] 
the right to contract appointment 
shall stand transferred to the 2nd 
widow or to a child (18 years or 
above in age) from the 2nd widow or 
to a child (18 years or above in age) 
from the 2nd widow or a minor child 
from the 2nd widow as soon as 
he/she attains age of 18 years but 
he/she has to exercise the option 
within two years of death.] 
Marriage Grant 
Marriage grant amounting to Rs. 8 
lac on wedding of one daughter, 
may be granted to family of 
deceased Government employees. 
Marriage grant amounting to Rs. 8 
lac on wedding of one daughter, may 
be granted to family of deceased 
Government employees. 
Health 
Free health facilities as per their 
entitlement during service. 
Free health facilities as per their 
entitlement during service. 
House 
Building 
Advance 
In case of advance against salaries 
sanctioned by the AGPR or the 
provincial AG Office, the unpaid 
balance to be waived. 
In case of advance against salaries 
sanctioned by the AGPR or the 
provincial AG Office, the unpaid 
balance to be waived. 
Nomination of an 
officer as council 
An officer of BS-17 or BS-18 may 
be nominated by each Ministry/ 
Division/Department as council 
who 
will 
be 
responsible 
for 
finalization/provision of all the 
facilities under the package, to the 
families of Govt. employees who 
die in service within one month of 
the incident.    
An officer of BS-17 or BS-18 may 
be nominated by each Ministry/ 
Division/Department as council who 
will be responsible for finalization/ 
provision of all the facilities under 
the package, to the families of Govt. 
employees who die in service within 
one month of the incident.    
Special Lump Sum 
Grant 
from 
Benevolent Fund 
 
A special lump sum grant from 
Benevolent 
Fund 
ranging 
from 
Rs.200,000 to Rs.500,000 
 
Sr. 
# 
Pay Scales 
(BS) 
Lump Sum 
Grant 
1. 
1-10 
200,000 
2. 
11-16 
300,000 
3. 
17-19 
400,000 
4. 
20 and above 
500,000 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 429 
 
 
ITEM 
IN SERVICE DEATHS 
SECURITY RELATED 
DEATHS 
Monthly 
Benevolent Grant 
Sr. # 
Pay Slabs 
Grant 
Minimum Maximum 
1 
Upto 
5,000 
4,000 
2 
5,001 
5,500 
4,150 
3 
5,501 
6,000 
4,300 
4 
6,001 
6,500 
4,450 
5 
6,501 
7,000 
4,600 
6 
7,001 
7,500 
4,750 
7 
7,501 
8,000 
4,900 
8 
8,001 
8,500 
5,050 
9 
8,501 
9,000 
5,200 
10 
9,001 
9,500 
5,350 
11 
9,501 
11,000 
5,600 
12 
11,001 
13,000 
5,900 
13 
13,001 
15,000 
6,200 
14 
15,001 
17,000 
6,500 
15 
17,001 
19,000 
6,800 
16 
19,001 
21,000 
7,100 
17 
21,001 
23,000 
7,400 
18 
23,001 
25,000 
7,700 
19 
25,001 
27,000 
8,000 
20 
27,001 
29,000 
8,300 
21 
29,001 
31,000 
8,600 
22 
31,001 
33,000 
8,900 
23 
33,001 
35,000 
9,200 
24 
35,001 
37,000 
9,500 
25 
37,001 
39,000 
9,800 
26 
39,001 
& above 
 
10,100 
Sr. # 
Pay Slabs 
Grant 
Minimum Maximum 
1 
Upto 
5,000 
8,000 
2 
5,001 
5,500 
8,300 
3 
5,501 
6,000 
8,600 
4 
6,001 
6,500 
8,900 
5 
6,501 
7,000 
9,200 
6 
7,001 
7,500 
9,500 
7 
7,501 
8,000 
9,800 
8 
8,001 
8,500 
10,100 
9 
8,501 
9,000 
10,400 
10 
9,001 
9,500 
10,700 
11 
9,501 
11,000 
11,200 
12 
11,001 
13,000 
11,800 
13 
13,001 
15,000 
12,400 
14 
15,001 
17,000 
13,000 
15 
17,001 
19,000 
13,600 
16 
19,001 
21,000 
14,200 
17 
21,001 
23,000 
14,800 
18 
23,001 
25,000 
15,400 
19 
25,001 
27,000 
16,000 
20 
27,001 
29,000 
16,600 
21 
29,001 
31,000 
17,200 
22 
31,001 
33,000 
17,800 
23 
33,001 
35,000 
18,400 
24 
35,001 
37,000 
19,000 
25 
37,001 
39,000 
19,600 
26 
39,001 
& above 
 
20,200 
Prerequisite 
for 
facilitation 
of 
family of deceased 
Govt. Employees 
In case of in service death of a 
government 
employee, 
the 
following 
pre-requisites 
must 
immediately be fulfilled by the 
concerned 
Ministry/Division/ 
Department so that the family of the 
deceased government employee may 
be facilitated without any delay:— 
 
a. 
Immediate 
submission 
of 
family pension case.  
b. 
Option form for Direct Credit 
Scheme (online payment of 
pension). 
c. 
Application for Anticipatory 
pension (80% of the total 
pension) Besides as a pro-
active 
approach 
each 
Ministry/Division/ Departm-
ent must observe the follow-
ing practices regarding their 
employees:— 
In case of in service death (security 
related) of a government employee, 
the following pre-requisites must 
immediately be fulfilled by the 
concerned 
Ministry/Division/ 
Department so that the family of the 
deceased government employee may 
be facilitated without any delay:— 
 
a. Immediate 
submission 
of 
family pension case.  
b. Option form for Direct Credit 
Scheme (online payment of 
pension). 
c. Application for Anticipatory 
pension (80% of the total 
pension). 
Besides as a pro-active approach each 
Ministry/Division/ Department must 
observe 
the 
following 
practices 
regarding their employees:— 
d. Up to date list of family 

Page - 430                     ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-04 
 
 
ITEM 
IN SERVICE DEATHS 
SECURITY RELATED 
DEATHS 
d. Up to date list of family 
members of each employee 
for 
pension 
purpose 
be 
maintained before hand.  
e. Nomination 
for 
General 
Provident Fund must be 
ensured for each employee in 
his/her life.  
members of each employee for 
pension  
purpose 
be 
maintained  before hand.  
 
e. Nomination 
for 
General 
Provident 
Fund 
must 
be 
ensured for each employee in 
his/her life.  
GP Fund 
Only payable amount of GP Fund 
shall be paid to the deceased family. 
Only payable amount of GP Fund 
shall be paid to the deceased family. 
Payment 
of 
Pension 
through 
Direct 
Credit 
Scheme (DCS) 
The following steps may be taken by 
the concerned Ministries/Divisions/ 
Departments 
for 
payment 
of 
pension 
through 
Direct 
Credit 
Scheme (DCS) (optional):— 
 
a. The Direct Credit Scheme 
must be made compulsory 
for 
all 
new 
pensioners/ 
family pensioners w.e.f 01-
01-2015. 
b. The manual both halves 
would be discontinued w.e.f 
01-01-2015 
for 
all 
new 
pensioners/family 
pensioners. 
c. The 
historical 
pensioners 
must be brought into the 
stream of DCS phase-wise.  
The following steps may be taken by 
the concerned Ministries/Divisions/ 
Departments for payment of pension 
through Direct Credit Scheme (DCS) 
(optional):— 
 
a. The Direct Credit Scheme 
must be made compulsory for 
all new pensioners/ family 
pensioners w.e.f 01-01-2015. 
b. The manual both halves would 
be discontinued w.e.f 01-01-
2015 
for 
all 
new 
pensioners/family pensioners. 
c. The historical pensioners must 
be brought into the stream of 
DCS phase-wise. 
 
2. 
The Prime Minister has also approved that:— 
(i) 
Relevant recruitment rules may be appropriately amended to provide 
for appointments of family members under the instant package; and 
(ii) 
A death will be deemed to be a ― Security Related death‖ if it occurs 
due to a terrorist act or while combating or confronting the 
terrorist(s), irrespective of the fact that the victim was member of 
Law Enforcement Agency (LEA) or Civilian employee. Death of a 
member of LEA due to a cause, other than a terrorist act, will be 
classified as an ―In-service death‖. 
[Authority.—Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 8/10/2013-E-2(Pt) dated 04-12-2015.] 
13.7 Revision of Assistance Package  
For Families of Government Employees 
Who Die in Service  
Refer to Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 8/10//2013-E-2 (Pt) dated 4th 
December, 2015 on the above captioned subject. It is informed that the Prime Minister 
has been pleased to approve with effect from 11th May, 2016 that employees of 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 431 
 
 
Provincial Government who are working in the Ministries/Divisions/ Attached 
Departments/Sub-ordinate offices etc. at Federal level on deputation basis and die during 
service/deputation, the families of the deceased employees are allowed to exercise the 
option of either availing the Federal or the Provincial package subject to completion of all 
others conditions/ instructions issued by Establishment Division from time to time.  
[Authority:-Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 7/26/2016-E-2 dated 18-05-2016.] 
13.8 Revision of Assistance Package for  
 
Families of Government Employees 
 
Who Die in Service 
CLARIFICATION 
 
Refer to the subject cited above and to state that the Prime Minister‘s Assistance 
Package was revised by the Federal Government as notified by the Establishment 
Division vide O.M No. 8/10/2013-E-2 dated 4th December,2015. After revision of 
Assistance Package, number of references have been received from different Ministries/ 
Divisions/ Departments regarding criteria for release of funds in lieu of plot. 
2. 
It is clarified for information of all concerned that a certificate regarding 
non-allotment of plot/house/flat from agencies allotting plot/house/flat such as Capital 
Development Authority (CDA). Federal Government Employees Housing Foundation 
(FGEHF), Pakistan Housing Authority (PHA) or any other Federal Government 
Department/agency or any Provincial Government Department/agency, as the case may 
be, be obtained before making any payment in lieu of plot under the revised Assistance 
Package. All the agencies/departments concerned allotting plot/house/flat are supposed to 
issue such certificates within a period of six (06) working days on receipt of any 
reference.  
3. 
As an alternative arrangement and for quick disposal of such cases 
Ministries/Divisions/Departments may obtain undertaking/affidavit from the family of 
the deceased that the deceased was not allotted any plot/house/flat by any government 
owned agency and that they would refund the amount received on this account if at any 
later stage it comes to the notice that the deceased employee was allotted a plot/house or 
flat by the Government or any agency of the government while he was in service. The 
parent department of the deceased employee would also be required to verify the fact 
about the deceased about the allotment of plot to the deceased as per record available 
with them.  
 
[Authority:—Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 8/24/2016-E-2 dated 22-06-2016.] 
 
13.9 Revision of Assistance Package for  
Families of Government Employees 
Who Die in Service 
Refer to the subject cited above and to state that the Prime Minister‘s Assistance 
Package was revised by the Federal Government as notified by the Establishment 
Division vide O.M No. 8/10/2013-E-2(Pt) dated 4th December, 2015. After revision of 
Assistance Package, number of references have been received from different 

Page - 432                     ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-04 
 
 
Ministries/Divisions/ Departments including AGPR, Islamabad seeking clarifications on 
100% pension to families of deceased Government Servants.  
2. 
The issue was taken up with Finance Division. Finance Division has 
clarified that as policy of the Federal Government, the Government servants who die 
while in service, 25% of the gross pension will be allowed as gratuity and rest 75% as 
family pension. The above benefits will be equal to full pension.  
[Authority.—Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 8/24/2016-E-2(Pt) dated 05-08-2016.] 
13.10 Revision of Assistance Package for Families  
of Government Employees Who Die in Service 
 
Refer to Establishment Division‘s O.M of even number dated 3rd August,2016 
on the above noted subject. It is clarified that Federal Government employees who died 
during service w.e.f. 01-07-2005 and survived by two or more widows and/or children 
from these widows, the families of such deceased Federal Government Servants, the right 
of contract appointment under the Assistance Package shall be decided on the same 
analogy/criteria as already notified by Establishment Division vide O.M of even number 
dated 3rd August, 2016 as referred above.  
[Authority.—Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 1/39/2013-E-2(Pt) dated 01-12-2016.] 
13.11 Revision of Assistance Package for  
Families of Government Employees 
Who Die in Service 
 
While disposing a Summary of Establishment Division on the above subject, the 
Prime Minister has been pleased to approve that Federal Government employees who go 
missing during service and are not recovered within a period of twelve months from the 
date of disappearance, and where there is a reasonable presumption of their having died 
shall be treated at par with Federal Government employees who die during service to the 
extent of payment of compensation and retirement benefits etc. subject to the condition 
that where such employee is recovered alive before or after the date of superannuation, 
the part of compensation linked to the presumption of death during service shall be paid 
back to the government or adjusted against pension payments of the employee. However, 
since only few federal government employees have gone missing during service, the 
Prime Minister has desired that their cases be submitted individually, with complete 
justification, for his orders rather than seeking a blanket approval.  
[Authority.—Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 8/08/2016-E.2 dated 08-09-2017.] 
13.12 Revision of Assistance Package for  
Families of Government Employees  
Who Die in Service 
 
Refer to the subject noted above and to say that the Prime Minister has been 
pleased to approve that the  

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 433 
 
 
―Claims arising during the period between 15-06-2013 and 09-02-2015, while 
the Assistance Package dated 20-10-2014 was in the field, have to be processed in 
accordance with the law and rights created under this package‖. 
2. 
The cases of Assistance Package falling under the above stated decision 
can be submitted to Finance Division for consideration of funds provision through  
re-appropriation/ Supplementary grants through respective FAs.  
[Authority:-Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 8/13/2016-E-2 dated 11-06-2018.] 
13.13 
Revision of Assistance Package for Families  
 
 
of Government Employees Who Die in Service 
 
 
(For Shuhda of ICT Police)  
Refer to Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 7/40/2005-E-2, dated 13th 
June,2006, O.M No. 8/10/2013-E-2 dated 20th October,2014, O.M. No. 8/10/2013-E-2, 
dated 9th February,2015 and O.M No. 8/10/2013 (E-II) (PT) dated 25th May,2015 
including amendments thereof issued from time to time on the subject noted above and to 
state that the Prime Minister has been pleased to approved the following revised 
Assistance Package for Shuhda of ICT Police who embrace Martyrdom/Shahadat during 
Service w.e.f. 11-07-2019:— 
Nature of Payment/Entitlement 
Amount/Benefits Admissible 
a) 
Lump Sum Grant in case of death in 
encounter, bomb blast, watch & ward 
duty, riots act of terrorism etc. 
LUMP SUM AMOUNT  
 
Ranks 
Lump sum amount 
(in Rupees) 
Constable-H.C 
Rs. 10 Million 
ASI-SI 
Rs. 12.5 Million 
Inspector-DSP 
Rs. 15 Million 
SP-SSP 
Rs. 18 Million 
DIG & above 
Rs. 20 Million 
b) 
Lump Sum Grant in case of death in 
accident while performing official duty 
subject to inquiry by Incharge S.P. /SSP. 
Ranks 
Lump sum amount 
(in Rupees) 
Constable-H.C 
Rs. 3 Million 
ASI-SI 
Rs. 4 Million 
Inspector-DSP 
Rs. 4.50 Million 
SP-SSP 
Rs. 5 Million 
DIG & above 
Rs. 7 Million 

Page - 434                     ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-04 
 
 
Nature of Payment/Entitlement 
Amount/Benefits Admissible 
 
i) 
Lump 
sum 
grant 
for 
permanent 
disability 
Rs.3,000,000/- 
to 
the 
officers/officials 
incapacitated 
and 
released from service for having become 
invalid 
as 
a 
result 
of 
injury 
in 
encounter/bomb 
blast/riots/watch 
and 
ward duty or terrorist activity. 
ii) Lump sum grant for Temporary 
 
disability 
Rs.1,000,000/- 
to 
the 
 
officers/officials incapacitated as a result 
 
of the injury in accidents as stated in para 
 
(i) above but who are still serving in the 
 
department. 
iii) Rs.200,000/- in case of serious injury. 
iv) Rs.100,000/- in case of minor injury. 
 
SALARY 
Full pay & allowances to the family of 
Shaheed till superannuation with increments 
and full benefits of rates of pay & allowances 
& ad-hoc relief etc. as revised by the 
Government from time to time.  
However, it will not be admissible in accident 
cases.  
PENSION 
Full pension after superannuation.  
ACCOMMODATION 
Retention of Government accommodation till 
the age of superannuation but not less than 05 
years.  
FUNDING FOR PURCHASE OF HOUSE 
Rank 
Minimum 
Area 
of 
House 
Price 
of 
House 
(in 
Rupees) 
Constable-HC  
5 Marla 
13.5 Million 
ASI-SI 
7 Marla 
17.5 Million 
Inspector-DSP 
10 Marla 
25 Million 
SP-SSP 
12 Marla 
30 Million 
DIG & Above 
20 Marla 
50 Million 
PROVISION OF TRANSPORT 
Families of Shaheed Police officers from the 
rank of SP and above will be provided a car 
(1300cc/Toyota Corolla) or equivalent amount 
whereas for Inspector & DSP, a car (1000cc) 
or equivalent amount shall be provided.  
 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 435 
 
 
Nature of Payment/Entitlement 
Amount/Benefits Admissible 
MAINTENANCE/TRANSPORT 
ALLOWANCE 
Rank 
Amount (in 
Rupees) 
DIG & Above 
100,000/- 
SSP/SP 
75,000/- 
DSP/Inspector 
50,000/- 
SI/ASI 
35,000/- 
HC/Constable 
20,000/- 
EMPLOYMENT 
Employment of next of kin shall be made on 
regular basis instead of contract appointment.  
EDUCATION  
Free education to all the children of the 
deceased government employees up to post-
graduation and all expenses in this context shall 
be borne by the Government.  
MARRIAGE GRANT 
Marriage grant amounting to Rs.8 lac on 
wedding of one daughter, may be granted to 
family of deceased Government employees. 
HOUSE BUILDING ADVANCE 
In case of advance against salaries sanctioned by 
the AGPR or the provincial AG office, the 
unpaid balance to be waived. 
HEALTH  
Free Health facilities as per their entitlement 
during service.  
GP FUND 
Only Payable amount of GP Fund shall be paid 
to the deceased family. 
SPECIAL LUMP SUM GRANT FROM 
BENEVOLENT FUND 
A special lump-sum grant from Benevolent 
Fund ranging from Rs.200,000 to 500,000 
S.No. Pay Scale (BS) 
Lump Sum 
Grant (Rs) 
1. 
1-10 
200,000 
2. 
11-16 
300,000 
3. 
17-19 
400,000 
4. 
20 and above 
500,000 
 
MONTHLY BENEVOLENT GRANT 
S# 
Pay Scale 
Grant 
Minimum 
Maximum 
1. 
Upto 
5,000 
8,000 
2. 
5,001 
5,500 
8,300 
3. 
5,501 
6,000 
8,600 
4. 
6,001 
6,500 
8,900 
5. 
6,501 
7,000 
9,200 

Page - 436                     ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-04 
 
 
Nature of Payment/Entitlement 
Amount/Benefits Admissible 
6. 
7,001 
7,500 
9,500 
7. 
7,501 
8,000 
9,800 
8. 
8,001 
8,500 
10,100 
9. 
8,501 
9,000 
10,400 
10. 
9,001 
9,500 
10,700 
11. 
9,501 
11,000 
11,200 
12. 
11,001 
13,000 
11,800 
13. 
13,001 
15,000 
12,400 
14. 
15,001 
17,000 
13,000 
15. 
17,001 
19,000 
13,600 
16. 
19,001 
21,000 
14,200 
17. 
21,001 
23,000 
14,800 
18. 
23,001 
25,000 
15,400 
19. 
25,001 
27,000 
16,000 
20. 
27,001 
29,000 
16,600 
21. 
29,001 
31,000 
17,200 
22. 
31,001 
33,000 
17,800 
23. 
33,001 
35,000 
18,400 
24. 
35,001 
37,000 
19,000 
25. 
37,001 
39,000 
19,600 
26. 
39,001 & 
above 
 
20,200 
Prerequisite for facilitation of family of 
deceased Govt. Employees 
In case of in service death (security related) of 
a government employee, the following pre-
requisites must immediately be fulfilled by the 
concerned Ministry/Division/Department so that 
the family of the deceased government employee 
may be facilitated without any delay:- 
(a) Immediate 
submission 
of 
family 
pension case. 
(b) Option form for Direct Credit Scheme 
(online payment of pension) 
(c) Application for Anticipatory Pension 
(80% of the total pension). 
Besides 
as 
pro-active 
approach 
each 
Ministry/Division/Department must observe 
the 
following 
practices 
regarding 
their 
employees:- 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 437 
 
 
Nature of Payment/Entitlement 
Amount/Benefits Admissible 
(d) 
Up to date list of family members of 
each employee for pension purpose be 
maintained before hand. 
(e) 
Nomination for General Provident Fund 
must be ensured for each employee in 
his/her life. 
Payment of Pension through Direct Credit 
Scheme (DCS) 
The following steps may be taken by the 
concerned 
Ministries/Divisions/Departments 
for payment of pension through Direct Credit 
Scheme (DCS) (optional):- 
(a) The direct Credit Scheme must be made 
compulsory 
for 
all 
new 
pensioners/family pensioners w.e.f. 01-
01-2015. 
(b) The manual both halves would be 
discontinued w.e.f.  01-01-2015 for all 
new pensioners/family pensioners. 
(c) The historical pensioners must be 
brought out into the stream of DCS 
phase-wise. 
 
 
2. 
The instant package is only applicable to Shuhda of ICT Police and shall 
supersede Assistance Package for families of Government Employees who die in service 
up to the extent of ―Security Related Deaths‖ issued vide No. 8/10/2013-E-2 (pt), dated 
4th December, 2015. 
[Authority:—Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 8/28/2018-E-2 dated 13-03-2020] 
13.14 
Appointment on Employees Son  
Quota Under Prime Minister’s 
Assistance Package 
 
Refer the subject cited above and to convey following recommendations/ 
findings of the Honourable Wafaqi Mohtasib (Ombudsman)‘s Secretariat in case No. 
HQR/00050/15, dated 12-02-2014, for strict compliance:— 
a. 
Condolence letters are sent by the heads of department to the next of kin of the 
deceased employee on the basis of death report to be submitted by the heads of 
office within 24 hours.  
b. Copy of Prime Minister‘s Assistance Package for families of government 
employees who die in service (alongwith its annexures) are regularly enclosed 
by the heads of departments with the condolence letters for knowledge/ 
information of the deceased family.  
c. 
Burial charges are paid to the next of kin by the heads of office through local 
arrangements before burial of the deceased and be adjusted in the claim.  

Page - 438                     ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-04 
 
 
d. Family Pension cases of the widows/widowers, as the case may be, are 
processed by the heads of office and sanctioned by the heads of department 
within a period of one month in future.  
e. 
Nomination for Fund as well as other nominations are regularly updated/revised 
by the employees in their life time after every ten years.  
 
2. 
The above instruction may also be brought into the notice of attached 
departments/subordinate offices of the Ministries/Divisions.  
[Authority.—Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 8/16/2014-E.2 dated 24-06-2015.] 
 
13.15 Revision of Assistance Package for Families of  
Government Employees Who Die in Service 
(For Shuhda of ANF Personnel) 
Refer to Establishment Division‘s O.M. No. 7/40/2005-E-2 dated 13th June, 
2006, O.M. No. 8/10/2013-E-2, dated 20th October, 2014, O.M. No. 8/10/2013-E-2, dated 
9th February, 2015 and O.M. No.8/10/2013 (E-II) (PT) dated 25th May, 2015 including 
amendments thereof issued from time to time on the subject noted above and to state that 
the Prime Minister has been pleased to approve the following revised Assistance Package 
for Shuhda of Anti-Narcotics Force (ANF) Employees who embrace Martyrdom/ 
Shahadat during service w.e.f. 01-07-2020. 
 
Nature of Payment/Entitlement 
Amount/Benefits Admissible 
Lump Sum Grant in case of death in, 
encounter, bomb Blast, watch & ward duty, 
riots, act of terrorism etc. 
LUMPSUM AMOUNT 
 
Rank 
Lump sum Amount 
(in Rupees) 
Constable-H.C. 
Rs. 10 Million 
ASI-SI 
Rs. 12.5 Million 
Inspector-Assistant 
Director 
Rs. 15 Million 
Deputy 
Director-
Joint Director 
Rs. 18 Million 
Director (BS-20) & 
Above 
Rs. 20 Million 
 
Lump Sum Grant in case of death in 
accident while performing official duty 
subject to inquiry by Incharge DD/JD 
 
Rank 
Lump sum Amount 
(in Rupees) 
Constable-H.C. 
Rs. 3 Million 
ASI-SI 
Rs. 4 Million 
Inspector-Assistant 
Director 
Rs. 4.50 Million 
Deputy 
Director-
Joint Director 
Rs. 5 Million 
Director (BS-20) & 
Above 
 
Rs. 7 Million 
 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 439 
 
 
Nature of Payment/Entitlement 
Amount/Benefits Admissible 
 
i) Lump sum grant for permanent disability 
Rs. 
3,000,000/- 
to 
the 
officer/official 
incapacitated and released from service for 
having become invalid as a result of injury 
in encounter/bomb blast/riots/watch and 
ward duty or terrorist activity. 
ii) Lump sum grant for temporary disability 
Rs. 
1,000,000/- 
to 
the 
officer/official 
incapacitated as a result of the injury in 
accidents as stated in para (i) above but who 
are still serving in the department.  
iii) Rs. 200,000/- in case of serious injury. 
iv) Rs. 100,000/- in case of Minor injury. 
Salary 
Full Pay & Allowances to the family of 
Shaheed till superannuation with increments 
and full benefits of rates of pay & allowances & 
adhoc relief etc. as revised by the Government 
from time to time. However, it will not be 
admissible in accident cases. 
Pension 
Full pension after superannuation. 
Accommodation 
Retention of Government accommodation till 
the age of superannuation but not less than 05 
years. 
Funding for purchase of House 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rank 
Minimum 
Area of 
House 
Price of 
House (In 
PKR) 
Constable-
H.C. 
5 Marla 
 13.5 Million 
ASI-SI 
7 Marla 
 17.5 Million 
Inspector-
Assistant 
Director 
10 Marla 
 25 Million 
Deputy 
Director-Joint 
Director 
12 Marla 
 30 Million 
Director (BS-
20) & Above 
20  Marla 
50 Million 
Provision of Transport 
The Families of Shaheed ANF officer from the 
rank of D.D. and above will be provided a car 
(1300cc/Toyota Corolla) or equivalent amount 
whereas for Inspector & AD, a Car (1000cc) or 
equivalent amount shall be provided. 
Maintenance/Transport Allowances 
 
Rank 
Lump sum Amount 
(in Rupees) 
Constable-H.C. 
20,000/- 
ASI-SI 
35,000/- 
Inspector-Assistant 
Director 
50,000/- 

Page - 440                     ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-04 
 
 
Nature of Payment/Entitlement 
Amount/Benefits Admissible 
Deputy 
Director-
Joint Director 
75,000/- 
Director (BS-20) & 
Above 
100,000/- 
Employment  
Employment of next of kin shall be made on 
regular basis instead of contract appointment. 
Education 
Free education to all the children for the 
deceased government employees of ANF up to 
post-graduation and all expenses in this context 
shall be borne by the Government. 
Marriage Grant 
Marriage grant amounting to Rs. 8 lac on 
wedding of one daughter may be granted to 
family of deceased employees of ANF. 
House Building Advance 
In case of advance against salaries sanctioned 
by the AGPR or the provincial AG Office, the 
unpaid balance to be waived. 
Health 
Free Health facilities as per their entitlement 
during service. 
GP Fund 
Only Payable amount of GP Fund shall be paid 
to the deceased family. 
Special Lump Sum Grant from Benevolent 
Fund 
A Special lump sum grant from Benevolent 
Fund ranging from Rs. 200,000 to Rs. 500,000 
BPS 
Amount 
1-10 
Rs. 200,000/- 
11-16 
Rs. 300,000/- 
17-19 
Rs. 400,000/ 
20 & above 
Rs. 500,000/ 
Monthly Benevolent Grant 
 
S# 
Pay Slabs 
Grant 
Minimum 
Maximum 
1. 
Up to 
5,000 
8,000 
2. 
5,001 
5,500 
8,300 
3. 
5,501 
6,000 
8,600 
4. 
6,001 
6,500 
8,900 
5. 
6,501 
7,000 
9,200 
6. 
7,001 
7,500 
9,500 
7. 
7,501 
8,000 
9,800 
8. 
8,001 
8,500 
10,100 
9. 
8,501 
9,000 
10,400 
10. 
9,001 
9,500 
10,700 
11. 
9,501 
11,000 
11,200 
12. 
11,001 
13,000 
11,800 
13. 
13,001 
15,000 
12,400 
14. 
15,001 
17,000 
13,000 
15. 
17,001 
19,000 
13,600 
16. 
19,001 
21,000 
14,200 
17. 
21,001 
23,000 
14,800 
18. 
23,001 
25,000 
15,400 
19. 
25,001 
27,000 
16,000 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 441 
 
 
Nature of Payment/Entitlement 
Amount/Benefits Admissible 
20. 
27,001 
29,000 
16,600 
21. 
29,001 
31,000 
17,200 
22. 
31,001 
33,000 
17,800 
23. 
33,001 
35,000 
18,400 
24. 
35,001 
37,000 
19,000 
25. 
37,001 
39,000 
19,600 
26. 
39,001 
& 
above  
 
20,200 
Prerequisite for facilitation of family of 
deceased Government employees of ANF. 
In case of service death (security related) of a 
government employee, the following pre-
requisites must immediately be fulfilled by the 
concerned Ministry/Division/Department so that 
the family of the deceased government 
employee may be facilitated without any delay:- 
a. Immediate submission of family pension 
case. 
b. Option form for Direct Credit Scheme 
(online payment of pension). 
c. Application for Anticipatory Pension (80% 
of the total pension). 
Besides as a pro-active approach each Ministry/ 
Division must observe the following practices 
regarding their employee:- 
d. Up to date list of family members of each 
employee for pension purpose be maintained 
beforehand. 
e. Nomination for General Provided Fund must 
be ensured for each employee in his /her life. 
Payment of Pension through Direct Credit 
Scheme (DCS) 
The following steps may be taken by the 
concerned Ministry/Division/Department for 
payment of pension through Direct Credit 
Scheme (DCS) (optional):- 
a. The Direct Credit Scheme must be made 
compulsory for all new pensioner(s)/family 
pensioner w.e.f. 01-01-2015. 
b. The 
manual 
both 
halves 
would 
be 
discontinued w.e.f. 01-01-2015 for all new 
pensioners/family pensioners. 
c. The historical pensioners must be brought 
into the stream of DCS phase-wise. 
 
2. 
The instant package is only applicable to Shuhda of ANF personnel and 
shall supersede Assistant Package for families of Government employees who die in 
service up to the extent of ―Security Related Deaths‖ issued vide O.M. No. 8/10/2013-
E-2(Pt), dated 4th December, 2015. 
[Authority.—Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 8/24/2020-E-2 dated 08-06-2021.] 
 
 

Page - 442                     ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-04 
 
 
XIII. MANAGEMENT POSITION SCALES POLICY,2020 
 
14.1 Management Position Scales Policy,2020 
 
The Prime Minister has been pleased to approve the Management Position Scales 
Policy,2020, hereinafter referred to as ―MP Scales Policy,2020‖ for making appointment of 
highly skilled/qualified professionals from open market on tenure basis (contract) against 
MP Scale positions in Ministries/Divisions, Attached Departments, Sub-ordinate Offices, 
Autonomous or Semi-Autonomous Bodies (either statutory or otherwise), Regulatory 
Authorities, etc. as under: 
 
1. 
Pay Scales:    
S# 
Description 
Remuneration/Pay Package  
I. 
Management Position Scale I (MP-I) 
As determined by Finance Division 
from time to time, with the approval 
of the Prime Minister. 
II. 
Management Position Scale II (MP-II) 
III. 
Management Position Scale III (MP-III) 
 
2. 
Need Assessment: 
 
The identification of need is an essential requirement for hiring of management 
scale professionals. For ascertaining the need for hiring a management scale professional, 
following shall be clearly established:— 
i) 
The position/posts against which the management scale professionals are 
required to be hired from open market should be identified clearly with due 
justification and expected outcome of hiring requisite human resources from 
open market.  
ii) 
The Finance Secretary, in consultation with Establishment Division, shall be 
empowered to approve creation of new MP Scale position.  
iii) 
The guiding principle for Ministries/Divisions should be that MP I Scale is 
meant for top tier, MP II scale for second tier and MP III Scale for third tier 
of Management positions in an organization.  
iv) 
In all cases of all such appointments, specific TORs will be developed by the 
Ministries/Divisions concerned featuring relevant qualification, experience, 
job descriptions with deliverable and timelines etc. keeping in view the 
needs, objectives & goals of the organizations. These TORs shall also be 
made part of final recommendations being sent to the appointing authority for 
making appointments.  
 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 443 
 
 
 
3. 
Initial Recruitment: 
 
The following criteria shall be observed for recruitment: 
i). 
Vacancies shall be widely advertised in the national press, principally 
appearing in at least two national dailies, one in English and other in Urdu, 
indicating the following: 
a) 
Terms of Reference based on the needs, objectives & goals of the 
organization. 
b) 
Job description, targets with timeline & deliverables. 
c) 
Job Specifications e.g. educational qualifications, requisite experience 
in number of year, age bracket, etc. 
d) 
Tenure of appointment. 
e) 
Pay package.  
ii). 
 The relevant field(s) of qualification and experience shall be specified by the 
concerned Ministry/Division for each position before the advertisement and 
shall be mentioned accordingly in the advertisement.  
iii). There shall be a Scrutiny Committee constituted with approval of the 
concerned Administrative Secretary as follows: 
 
An officer not below the rank of Additional 
Chairperson 
 
Secretary (where there is no Additional Secretary, 
 
then senior JS or JS of the concerned Division 
 
Head of HR Wing of concerned organization       
Member 
 
Joint Secretary/Deputy Secretary of     
 
Member cum 
the concerned Division  
 
 
Secretary 
iv). 
This Scrutiny Committee shall scrutinize applications and, based on the 
advertised criteria, prepare a list of all eligible candidates for interview by the 
Selection Committee constituted as per Schedule-I. There shall be no 
shortlisting of eligible candidates and all candidates having basic eligibility as 
per advertised eligibility criteria will be called for interview by the Selection 
Committee.  
v). 
The Selection Committee, after conducting the interviews, shall recommend 
to the appointing authority a panel of minimum three (03) suitable candidates 
for each position, in order of merit, for appointment against the position.  

Page - 444                     ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-04 
 
 
vi). 
While submitting the case to the appointing authority, the necessary 
documents, e.g. sanction of post(s), advertisement, list of all eligible 
candidates duly signed by the Scrutiny Committee, original score sheet and 
minutes of the meeting of the Selection Committee duly signed shall 
invariably be annexed with the summary moved for the purpose. 
vii). The summary for the Prime in the matter shall invariably be moved through 
Establishment Division, without fail, and in case of submission of an 
incomplete case, the Establishment Division shall have the powers to return 
the summary without seeking further orders of the Prime Minister.  
viii). [In case, considering the particular requirements of any MP Scale Position 
(s), if the Ministry/Division instead of issuing open advertisement of the post 
intends to opt for headhunting against the said position (s), it may do so with 
prior approval of the Minister Incharge concerned by hiring the services of a 
professional head hunting firm, through a competitive process].   
4. 
Contract Extension: 
 
i). 
The appointment in MP Scales shall initially be for a period of three (03) 
years which will be extendable for a maximum period of two (02) years on 
annual basis subject to satisfactory performance evaluation of the incumbent 
by the Performance Evaluation Committee provided in Schedule-II. 
 
ii). 
All Ministries/Divisions shall invariably initiate cases for extension of the 
contract not less than three (03) months before the expiry of contract. The 
cases for extension with less than three (03) months to the expiry of contract 
may not be entertained and the Ministries should initiate the process of 
recruitment afresh as per procedure given in para-3. In such cases, the 
Ministries/Divisions shall ensure the completion of the process before the 
expiry of the contract of the incumbent.   
 
iii). 
The concerned Ministries/Divisions shall evaluate the performance of the 
employees in MP Scales annually as per criteria given in Schedule-II. 
 
iv). 
These Performance Evaluation Reports shall be placed before the 
Performance Evaluation Committee for review/consideration at the time of 
contract extension.  
 
v). 
These Performance 
Evaluation 
Committee 
subject 
to 
satisfactory 
performance review of the incumbent may recommend to the appointing 
authority for extension in the contract of the incumbent. 
                                                          
 Added vide Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 1/3/2020-E-6 dated 05-08-2020.  

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 445 
 
 
5. 
Terms and Conditions: 
S. 
No. 
Description 
MP-I 
MP-II 
MP-III 
1. 
Required 
Educational 
Qualification 
and Experience 
Ph.D 
in 
relevant 
subject(s) with 14 years 
[**] 
professional 
experience or Masters in 
relevant subject(s) with 
18 years experience in 
the relevant field.  
Ph.D 
in 
relevant 
subject(s) 
with 
10 
years 
*[**] 
professional 
experience 
in 
the 
relevant 
field 
or 
Masters in relevant 
subject(s) 
with 
14 
years experience in 
the relevant field.  
Ph.D in relevant subject(s) 
with 
06 
years 
*[**] 
professional experience in 
the 
relevant 
field 
or 
Masters 
in 
relevant 
subject(s) with 10 years 
experience in the relevant 
field.  
2. 
Age Limit 
[****]  
Maximum=62 
(to be calculated as on 
the 
closing 
date 
of 
submission 
of 
applications) 
***[****] 
Maximum=62 
(to be calculated as on 
the closing date of 
submission 
of 
applications) 
@[****] 
Maximum=62 
(to be calculated as on the 
closing date of submission 
of applications) 
3. 
Tenure 
of 
contract 
Initially for a period of 
three (03) years further 
extendable 
for 
a 
maximum 
period 
of 
two 
(02) 
years 
on 
annual (yearly) basis 
subject to satisfactory 
performance. 
Initially for a period 
of three (03) years 
further 
extendable 
for a maximum period 
of two (02) years on 
annual (yearly) basis 
subject to satisfactory 
performance. 
Initially for a period of 
three (03) years further 
extendable 
for 
a 
maximum period of two 
(02) 
years 
on 
annual 
(yearly) basis subject to 
satisfactory performance.  
4. 
Termination of 
contract 
On 
completion 
of 
tenure or one month‘s 
notice from either side. 
In case of notice by the 
concerned 
Ministry/ 
Division, it shall be 
after approval of the 
appointing authority. In 
case 
of 
proceedings 
under para-6 (viii & ix) 
of the policy ibid, the 
condition 
of 
one 
month‘s notice shall 
not be required.   
On completion of 
tenure 
or 
one 
month‘s notice from 
either side. In case of 
notice 
by 
the 
concerned Ministry/ 
Division, it shall be 
after approval of the 
appointing authority. 
In 
case 
of 
proceedings 
under 
para-6 (viii & ix) of 
the policy ibid, the 
condition 
of 
one 
month‘s notice shall 
not be required.   
On completion of tenure 
or one month‘s notice 
from either side. In case 
of 
notice 
by 
the 
concerned 
Ministry/ 
Division, it shall be after 
approval of the appointing 
authority. 
In 
case 
of 
proceedings under para-6 
(viii & ix) of the policy 
ibid, the condition of one 
month‘s notice shall not 
be required.   
                                                          
 Words ―Post Qualification‖ deleted vide Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 1/3/2020-E-6, dated 05-08-2020. 
 Words ―Minimum age=45‖ deleted vide Establishment Div.‘s O.M No.1/3/2020-E-6, dated 05-08-2020.  
*** Words ―Minimum age=40‖ deleted vide ibid. 
@ Words ―Minimum age=35‖ deleted vide Establishment Division‘s O.M No.1/3/2020-E-6, dated 05-08-2020 

Page - 446                     ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-04 
 
 
S. 
No. 
Description 
MP-I 
MP-II 
MP-III 
5. 
Leave 
The incumbent shall 
earn leave on full pay 
@ 3 days per month on 
annual basis and the 
leaves earned shall be 
availed 
during 
the 
currency of the year. 
Title of Leave will 
neither be carried over 
to the next year in case 
of non-availing nor will 
it be encashed.  
The 
incumbent 
shall earn leave on 
full pay @ 3 days 
per 
month 
on 
annual basis and 
the leaves earned 
shall be availed 
during 
the 
currency 
of 
the 
year. 
Title 
of 
Leave will neither 
be carried over to 
the next year in 
case 
of 
non-
availing nor will it 
be encashed.  
The 
incumbent 
shall 
earn leave on full pay 
@ 3 days per month on 
annual basis and the 
leaves earned shall be 
availed 
during 
the 
currency of the year. 
Title of Leave will 
neither be carried over 
to the next year in case 
of non-availing nor will 
it be encashed.  
6. 
Discipline 
As application in case 
of contract employees. 
As application in 
case of contract 
employees. 
As application in case of 
contract employees. 
7. 
Appointing 
Authority 
Prime Minister on the 
recommendations 
of 
the 
Selection 
Committee. 
Annual 
extension in contract 
will also be given by 
Prime 
Minister 
on 
recommendations 
of 
Performance 
Evaluation Committee.  
Prime Minister on 
the recommendations 
of 
the 
Selection 
Committee. Annual 
extension in contract 
will also be given by 
Prime Minister on 
recommendations of 
Performance 
Evaluation 
Committee.  
Prime Minister on the 
recommendations of the 
Selection 
Committee. 
Annual 
extension 
in 
contract will also be given 
by Prime Minister on 
recommendations 
of 
Performance 
Evaluation 
Committee.  
 
 
6. 
Miscellaneous: 
i). 
Unless any other law/rules, for the time being in force, provide 
otherwise, regular Civil Servant/Government Servants shall not be 
substantively posted against MP Scale Positions. 
ii). 
Civil Servants/Government Servants may, however, subject to 
eligibility, apply for these positions, through proper channel.  
iii). Subject to provisions of (i) above, in case a Civil Servant/ Government 
Servant is selected through competitive process against any such 
position, he/she shall either resign from Government Service or seek 
early retirement, severing his/her connection/lien with their parent 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 447 
 
 
cadre/Ministry/ Division/organization, etc., before joining the MP 
Scale Position.  
iv). 
The persons already employed on MP Scales shall submit to the 
government an affidavit declaring their non-involvement in any other 
relevant business/job which may tantamount to conflict of interest.  
v). 
The persons already employed on MP Scale positions and are holding 
the MP Scale position on the date of commencement of this policy, 
shall henceforth be governed under the MP Scales Policy, 2020 in all 
matters including but not limited to tenure, performance evaluation and 
contract extension, etc. as the case may be. The tenure of the 
incumbents in all such cases shall be reckoned from the date of their 
initial appointment on MP Scale whether made through competitive 
process or otherwise[: 
 
  
Provided that the tenure of appointment, as contained in the 
terms and conditions of the incumbent(s) determined at the time of 
their initial appointment, shall in no case be construed to be 
automatically extended to three (03) years from the date of initial 
appointment of such incumbent: 
 
  
Provided 
further 
that 
in 
such 
cases, 
where 
the 
Ministries/Divisions have already advertised the MP Scale positions 
prior to introduction of MP Scales Policy,2020, the tenure of the post 
advertised shall remain the same contained in the MP Policy applicable 
at the time of the advertisement.] 
vi). 
Current charge or additional charge of the positions of MP Scales may 
not be granted to any regular civil/Government servants. However, in 
cases of Heads of Autonomous bodies/Semi-Autonomous bodies, 
Executive/Attached Department, Regulatory Authorities, Corporations, 
Commissions and Companies etc. where the situation necessitates, the 
additional charge may only be granted to a civil/ government servant of 
equivalent grade as given in Schedule-III with approval of the 
appointing authority for a maximum period of three (03) months only. 
No extra remuneration will be given to the officer holding the 
additional charge other than additional charge allowance as determined 
by Finance Division from time to time. 
vii). After completion of one tenure of 3/4/5 years *[under this policy or the 
policy dated 18-08-1998], as the case may be, the incumbent shall be 
                                                          
 Added vide Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 1/3/2020-E-6, dated 16-09-2020. 

Page - 448                     ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-04 
 
 
eligible to compete afresh against any MP Scale position, subject to 
meeting the advertised criteria.  
viii). Anytime during currency of initial or extended tenure, the performance 
evaluation score of the incumbent falls in average or unsatisfactory 
category, the Secretary of the Division concerned/PAO may issue 
formal warnings to the incumbent MP Scale holder. 
ix). 
If satisfied with the valid reasons (unsatisfactory performance or 
evidence of financial or moral turpitude against the incumbent), the 
concerned Secretary, if deems fit and after fulfilling the formalities of 
disciplinary proceedings, may initiate a summary seeking approval of 
the Prime Minister for pre-mature termination of contract through 
Establishment Division. 
x). 
In case of financial corruption or any other criminal charge, the 
references may also be filed with the relevant Law Enforcement or 
Anti-Graft Agencies.  
xi). 
Such person(s), who has been removes from Government Service or 
from an MP Scale Position due to unsatisfactory performance or on 
account of moral & financial turpitude, shall not be eligible to apply for 
any MP Scale position. All Ministries/Divisions shall inform 
Establishment Division shall maintain a negative list of all such 
disqualified persons which shall be circulated amongst all concerned 
Ministries/Divisions, from time to time.  
xii). The policy shall only be applicable on statutory bodies, including 
regulatory authorities, in such cases, where recruitment rules or service 
regulations for such positions have not been prescribed under the 
respective statutes. Statutory authorities and other authorities/ 
organizations shall also be allowed to adopt the instant policy, with 
approval of the authority competent to do so, while remaining within 
their statutory mandate.  
xiii). The MP Scales shall also be used as benchmark scales for 
determination of terms and conditions of other positions in statutory 
bodies like FPSC, FST, OGRA, NEPRA, etc., with approval of the 
respective authorities competent to approve terms and conditions of 
such posts. In such cases, the other provisions of the MP Scale 
Policy,2020 shall not apply.  
xiv)-A. 
[If, keeping in view the specific requirements for any particular 
position(s), any Ministry/Division intends to modify or change the 
                                                          
Added vide Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 1/3/2020-E-6, dated 05-08-2020. 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 449 
 
 
―Required Educational Qualification and Experience‖, a Summary for 
the Prime Minister shall be moved for the purpose, through 
Establishment Division, by giving therein full justification of the case; 
Provided that any such case shall invariably be moved prior to 
advertising such a position]. 
xiv)-B 
[Prior to submission of the case for orders of the Prime Minister, in 
terms of sub-para (xvi)-A above, the Division concerned shall send the 
case to Establishment Division for consideration and recommendations 
by the Committee consisting of the following:— 
a) 
Secretary, Establishment Division (Convener) 
b) 
Secretary, Cabinet Division 
c) 
Secretary, Finance Division 
d) 
Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission 
e) 
Secretary, Law and Justice Division 
f) 
Any member to be co-opted by the Committee] 
xv). 
[All previous Office Memorandums/policy instructions, issued by 
Finance and Establishment Division from time to time relating to MP 
Scale positions, shall stand repealed with immediate effect, in so far as 
these are inconsistent with the MP Scales Policy,2020].  
[Authority.—Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 1/3/2020-E-6 dated 12-01-2021]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
 Added vide Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 1/3/2020-E-6 dated 12-01-2021. 
 Sub-para (xiv) renumbered as Sub-para (xv) vide Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 1/3/2020-E-6, dated                  
05-08-2020. 

Page - 450                     ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-04 
 
 
SCHEDULE-I 
 
1. 
The composition of the Selection Committee will be as follows:— 
Minister Incharge/Minister of State 
(Where the charge of a Ministry/Division is held by the Prime 
Minister, the selection board shall be headed by a Federal 
Minister/Minister of State/Adviser to the Prime Minister/Special 
Assistant to the Prime Minister, as nominated by the Prime 
Minister).  
Chairman 
Secretary of the concerned Division 
Member 
Additional Secretary-II, Establishment Division 
Member 
Additional Secretary of the concerned Division or in case there is 
no Additional Secretary in the Division, the Joint Secretary 
concerned. 
Member 
As given in para-2 of this schedule 
Co-opted Member(s) 
 
 
 
2. 
Following members may be co-opted on case to case basis: 
The non-executive Chairman of the Board of Directors or a senior 
member of the Board of Directors of the institution in cases where 
such Board exists. 
Co-opted Member 
On expert having domain knowledge to be nominated by the 
Minister Incharge on recommendations of the Secretary concerned. 
Co-opted Member 
Head of Autonomous Body (In case of appointment in an 
autonomous body). 
Co-opted Member 
 
3. 
If appointments are to be made in Prime Minister‘s Office or the President 
Secretariat, the Secretary of the Division would mean the Cabinet Secretary.  
SCHEDULE-II 
 
1. 
The composition of the Performance Evaluation Committee will be as 
follows:— 
Secretary, Establishment Division  
Chairperson 
Secretary, Finance Division 
Member 
Secretary of the Administrative Division concerned 
Member 
Joint Secretary concerned of Establishment Division 
Secretary 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 451 
 
 
Head of Autonomous Body concerned (if the post belongs to an 
autonomous body) 
Co-opted Member 
 
2. 
Performance Evaluation Criteria: The following template has been 
devised for objective assessment of performance on annual basis by the Performance 
Evaluation Committee for each post of MP Scale: 
ANNUAL PERFORMANCE EVALUATION TEMPLATE 
Major Tasks/ 
Key Result 
Areas (To be 
taken from Job 
Description) 
Target 
(To be 
determined in 
quantitative 
terms) 
% of  
Target 
Achieved 
Percentage 
Weightage  
(May be allocated on 
the basis of sensitivity 
of each task) 
% Score*  
(Col.3 x 
Col.4) 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
1 
 
 
 
 
1.1 
1.2 
--- 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 
 
2.1 
2.2 
---- 
 
 
 
 
Total 
100 
 
*%Age Score= Percentage weightage x Percentage target achieved 
CATEGORIZATION OF PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 
Performance Category 
Score 
Evaluation Classification 
Excellent 
90-100 
A 
Very Good 
80-89 
B 
Good 
70-79 
C 
Average 
60-69 
D 
Unsatisfactory: 
Does 
not 
meet 
expectations 
and 
standards. 
Less than 60 
E 
 
 
3. 
The employee may be categorized ranging from ―Excellent‖ to 
―Unsatisfactory‖ as per the table which will serve the purpose for retention or otherwise 
depending on the score achieved by the incumbents in their Performance Evaluation. The 
reporting channels for such posts in the set up are to be clearly identified by the 
Ministry/Division concerned.  

Page - 452                     ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-04 
 
 
 
4. 
Establishment Division shall function as Secretariat of the Performance 
Evaluation Committee and the cases referred to the Committee shall as far as possible be 
considered in formal meetings of the Committee. The mode of consideration of cases 
through circulation may only be an exception and shall not be a routine.  
SCHEDULE-III 
Equivalence of MP Scales with Basic Pay Scales 
MP-I Scale 
BPS-22 
MP-II Scale 
BPS-21 
MP-III Scale 
BPS-20 
 
14.2 General Criteria for Need Assessment, Recruitment 
and Performance Evaluation for Hiring Contractual  
Appointment in Special Professional Pay Scale  
(SPPS-I, II & III) in Ministries/Divisions 
 
The Federal Government has been pleased to introduce Special Professional Pay 
Scales (SPPS-I,II & III) for hiring of Special Professional Experts/Hiring Skilled and 
Specialized Manpower with following pay packages and terms and conditions:— 
S# 
Description  
Remunerations            
(all inclusive) 
I. 
Special Professional Pay Scale (SPPS-I) 
1.5-2.00 Million 
II. 
Special Professional Pay Scale (SPPS-II) 
1.0-1.49 Million 
III. 
Special Professional Pay Scale (SPPS-III) 
0.5-0.99 Million 
 
 
2. 
Need Assessment: The need identification is an essential requirement for 
hiring of professional in specific areas. The following criteria may be followed for the 
purpose:— 
i) 
To ascertain that expertise required by the concerned Ministries/Divisions in 
the specialized fields/areas are not available within the sanctioned strength of 
the Ministries/Divisions at Federal level to avoid duplication.   
ii) 
Specific TORs/tasks for each identified area has to be framed by the 
Ministries/Divisions concerned clearly specifying the additional Human 
Resource (HR) requirement (position/post-wise break-up) in specialized 
field, their Educational Qualification, Job Description and Job Specification 
with timeline, etc. 
iii) 
Targets in quantitative terms may be developed for each identified area and 
the same will be made part of the contractual appointment.  

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 453 
 
 
iv) 
Deliverables may clearly be identified and indicated.  
 
3. 
Recruitment: The following criteria may be observed for recruitment 
against SPPS positions:— 
 
i) 
Vacancies may widely be advertised in the national press indicating the term 
of Reference, tenure of assignment, required job description and job 
specification for each identified area/position to ensure transparency and 
merit.   
 
ii) 
The required educational qualifications, posts professional certification etc. 
and relevant experience alongwith age (minimum and maximum) for each 
identified position as a result of need assessment may clearly be elaborated in 
the advertisement which is to be implemented in letter and spirit. 
 
iii) 
[Duration of the appointment against these contractual positions may be for 
a maximum tenure of two years, extendable for a further period of two years 
contingent upon result-based performance and pay package thereof for each 
category may clearly be identified in line with approved tenure and package 
for SPPS-I,II & III as the case may be].    
 
iv) 
The recruitment will be contractual based appointment and terms and 
conditions thereof including code of conduct, procedure of disciplinary 
proceedings in case of any misconduct, misappropriation and embezzlement 
of funds or any deviation from the prescribed guidelines and other service 
provisions including termination of contract may also be clearly indicated for 
each area/category.  
 
v) 
An in-house Committee headed by Additional Secretary of the concerned 
Ministry/Division may be constituted for scrutiny of the applicant‘s paper for 
placement before the Special Selection Board.  
 
vi) 
A Special Selection Board may be constituted in line with the criteria duly 
approved by the Federal Cabinet and notified by Establishment Division with 
the following composition:— 
Scale/Position 
Composition of the Committee 
SPPS-I  
Federal Minister or Minister of State or Adviser of the relevant 
Ministries/Divisions, Secretary of relevant Ministry/Division, a BS-21 
representative of Establishment Division and two co-opted experts of the 
relevant field. Provided that where the charge of a Ministry/Division is held 
by the Prime Minister, the selection board shall be headed by a Minister 
Incharge/Minister of State/Adviser to the Prime Minister/Special Assistant 
to the Prime Minister, as nominated by the Prime Minister, in terms of this 
O.M No. 1/72/2002-E-6, dated 11-04-2005 *[as amended from time to 
time]. 
SPPS-II &III 
Secretary of the relevant Ministries/Divisions, a BS-21 representative of 
Establishment Divisions and two co-opted experts of the relevant field.  
 
                                                          
 Subs.& added vide Establishment Division‘s Corrigendum No. 1/11/2018-E-6 dated 26-04-2019. 

Page - 454                     ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-04 
 
 
vii) The approval of the Prime Minister may invariably be solicited for positions 
in SPPS-I, II and III for every action from initial stage of recruitment till its 
completion i.e. advertisement, for selection on the provision of a panel of 
minimum of three candidates selected through a competitive process by the 
Special Selection Board as well as for the extended period contingent upon 
proper justification and result based performance.  
viii) There shall be no fresh appointment or extension in appointment beyond the 
age of 65 years.  
ix) 
[The contract of appointment may be terminated on one month notice on 
either side or payment of one month‘s basic pay in lieu thereof . 
x) 
The incumbent shall earn leave on full pay @ 3 days per month for the period 
of duty. The leave shall be availed during the currency of contract period. 
Title to leave shall expire on expiry of contract, if given a fresh contract, the 
period of earned leave available in respect of the previous contract shall not 
be carried forward.]  
 
4. 
Performance Evaluation: Performance measurement and evaluation is the 
key for employee as well for the organization as it facilitates a decision making process for 
further retention of the incumbents or otherwise. The following template has been devised 
for objective assessment of performance on annual basis by the Special Selection Board for 
each category of contractual employment which may be implemented with letter and spirit:— 
ANNUAL PERFORMANCE EVALUATION TEMPLATE 
Major Tasks/Key 
Result Areas 
Target 
(To be determi-ned 
in quantita-tive 
terms) 
% of  
Target 
Achieved 
Percentage 
Weightage (May be 
allocated on the 
basis of sensitivity 
of each task) 
% Score* 
(Col.3xCol.4) 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
1 
 
 
 
 
1.1 
1.2 
---- 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 
 
2.1 
2.2 
---- 
 
 
 
 
n1 
n 2 
----- 
 
 
 
 
Total 
100 
 
        *% age Score = Percentage weightage x Percentage target achieved 
                                                          
 Added vide Establishment Division‘s Corrigendum No. 1/11/2018-E-6 dated 26-04-2019. 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 455 
 
 
CATEGORIZATION OF PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 
Performance Category 
Score 
Evaluation Classification 
 Excellent  
90-100 
A 
 Very Good 
80-89 
B 
 Good 
70-79 
C 
 Average 
60-69 
D 
 Unsatisfactory: Does not meet 
 expectations and standards. 
Less than 60 
E 
 
5. 
The employee may be categorized ranging from ―Excellent‖ to 
―Unsatisfactory‖ as per the tables which will serve the purpose for retention or otherwise 
depending on the score achieved by the professionals in their Performance Evaluation. The 
reporting channels for such posts in the setup be clearly identified.  
[Authority.– Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No.1/11/2018-E-6, dated 22-03-2019]. 
 
14.3 Clarification Regarding General Criteria for Need  
Assessment, Recruitment and Performance Evaluation 
for Hiring Contractual Appointment in Special Professional 
Pay Scale (SPPS-I,II & III) in Ministries/Divisions  
 
Refer to General Criteria for Need Assessment, Recruitment and Performance 
Evaluation for Hiring contractual appointment in Special Professional Pay Scale (SPPS-I, II & 
III) in Ministries/Divisions issued by Establishment Division vide O.M of even number 
dated 22-03-2019. 
 
2. 
With the approval of the Prime Minister, following is clarified:— 
 
i) 
With reference to Para-3, sub-para-vii of the above referred O.M, approval of 
the Prime Minister shall be clearly solicited for the following actions during 
the process of recruitment under SPPS:— 
 
 
a) 
Advertisement for the positions in SPPS-I, II & III and Constitution of 
the Special Selection Board; 
 
 
 
b) 
Final recommendations of the Special Selection Board and; 
 
 
c) 
Extension in the contract, if any, contingent upon proper justification 
and result based performance.  
 
ii) 
With respect to the activity of Need Assessment prior to making appointment 
under SPPS as provided vide para-2 of the above referred O.M, it is clarified 
that the Special Professional Pay Scales (SPPS) may only be offered to the 
highly qualified professionals who are to be hired against the positions 
requiring technical expertise in some specialized field(s) instead of 

Page - 456                     ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-04 
 
 
general/non-technical or managerial skills as required in case of Management 
Professionals under MP Scales. For this purpose, the sponsoring Division shall 
undertake an exhaustive Need Assessment based on specific Parameters/TORs 
developed especially for such posts/positions thereby justifying the hiring of 
technical specialist under SPPS instead of hiring under MP Scales. This Need 
Assessment carrying all necessary justifications shall be made part of the 
initial summary submitted to the Prime Minister for hiring under SPPS.     
[Authority:– Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No.1/11/2018-E-6, dated 03-12-2019]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 457 
 
 
XIV. 
ACCOMMODATION FACILITIES TO GOVERNMENT SERVANT  
 
15.1 Provision of Government Accommodation 
to all Government Servants Employed on  
Contract after Superannuation 
 
In partial modification of Establishment Division O.M. of even number dated 
12.8.1998 and 9.10.1998, the competent authority has been pleased to decide that all 
government servants, who have been re-employed on contract after the age of 
superannuation, shall be entitled to retain the allotted government accommodation. 
 
2.  
Ministries/Divisions are requested to bring the above decision to the notice 
of their Attached Departments and Subordinate Offices. 
 
[Authority:– Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No.10/52/95-R.2(Pt), dated 7-11-1998]. 
15.2 
Provision of Accommodation to Persons 
 
Employed on Contract by Organizations  
 
from Own Available Accommodation 
 
Reference Establishment Division O.M.No.10/52/95-R.2(Pt.) dated 12.8.1998. A 
question has arisen whether the instructions contained therein are applicable to persons 
employed on contract by the government departments which have their own 
accommodation. The matter has been considered carefully and the competent authority has 
been pleased to decide that in case any organisation has official accommodation available 
(other than pool accommodation of Estate Office) for allotment to its contractual employees, 
the same may be allotted in accordance with the rules of the respective department. 
 
2. 
The competent authority has further been pleased to decide that 
officers/officials on retirement, shall be entitled to retain official accommodation for a period 
of six (6) months instead of two (2) months, as at present, and no extension shall be allowed 
beyond the aforementioned period. Retiring officers/officials should prepare themselves 
accordingly. 
 
3.  
Ministries/Divisions are requested to bring the above decisions to the notice 
of the Departments and organisations under their administrative control. 
[Authority:– Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No.10/52/95-R.2(Pt), dated 1-6-1999]. 
 
 
15.3 Provision of Government-Owned or Hired  
Residence to Persons Appointed on Contract 
 
In supersession of all previous instructions on the subject, the Chief Executive‘s 
Secretariat have conveyed approval of the competent authority to the following:— 
(i) 
Persons appointed on contract to civil posts relating to the affairs of the 
Federation, may be provided the same facility of government owned or 
hired residence as is admissible to persons of corresponding grade in the 
civil service. 
                                                          
 The Prime Minister‘s Sectt. (Public). 

Page - 458                     ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-04 
 
 
(ii)   Autonomous/semi-autonomous bodies/corporations under the Federal 
Government may also be advised to follow the aforesaid policy subject to 
such modification as may be permissible under their prescribed service 
regulations. 
 
2. 
Ministries/Divisions are, therefore, requested to take necessary action 
accordingly. 
[Authority: Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 10/52/95-R.2, dated 25th June, 2001] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 459 
 
 
XV. 
GOVERNMENT POLICY IN REGARD TO AUTONOMOUS BODIES  
 
16.1 Government Policy in Regard to Autonomous 
Bodies Established through Resolutions  
 
A number of autonomous bodies were established by the Federal Government 
from time to time through Resolutions under which some measure of functional 
autonomy was allowed to the Board of Governors/ Board of Directors for the purpose of 
effective discharge of their allocated responsibilities. The legal status of such organizations 
came up for consideration before the Supreme Court in Civil Appeal No.154 of 1988, and it 
was held by the Court that organizations established through Resolutions were not bodies 
corporate but government departments, and their employees were held to be civil servants. 
 
2. 
In the light of the aforesaid decision of the Supreme Court, the question 
whether the organizations established through Resolution should be made bodies 
corporate after fulfilling the required legal formality, or be run as a department of government 
has remained under consideration of the government for some time. The Chief Executive has 
now been pleased to approve the following general policy guidelines:- 
(i) 
All Ministries/Divisions incharge of organizations through Resolution should 
determine in consultation with the Management Services Wing of Cabinet 
Division whether those organizations should be run as Government 
Department (i.e. Attached Department or Subordinate Office) or as 
autonomous body. 
(ii) 
Whether it is considered necessary in the public interest to run an organization 
as an autonomous body for the effective discharge of its functions, the 
Ministries/Divisions concerned under the relevant law or draft a separate 
legislation in consultation with Law and **Cabinet Divisions for changing 
legal status of the organizations to that of a body corporate. 
 
3. 
All Ministries/Divisions are requested to take necessary action accordingly. 
[Authority: Estt. Div.‘s OM No. 4/1/91-R.7/R.3, dated 6th September, 2000] 
 
16.2 
Procedure Regarding Appointments in  
 
Autonomous/Semi-Autonomous Bodies,  
 
Under the Federal Government  
 
In supersession of the instructions issued vide Office Memorandum No.1/85/94-E.6, 
dated the 12th September, 1994,  henceforth the cases of appointment to various posts in 
autonomous/semi-autonomous bodies shall be processed in accordance with the following 
guidelines:–  
                                                          
 Now Prime Minister. 
 Management Services Wing is now under the Establishment Division. 

Page - 460                     ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-04 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of Case 
Selection Procedure 
Approving 
Authority 
i. 
Appointment of *[**] /Head 
of the Organization 
Selection Board headed by 
the Minister Incharge to 
consider 
and 
recommend 
from a panel of three names 
for each vacancy.  
 
Provided that, where the 
charge 
of 
a 
Ministry/ 
Division is held by the Prime 
Minister, the Selection Board 
shall 
be 
headed 
by 
a 
Ministry/ 
Division 
of 
State/Advisor to the Prime 
Minister/SAPM 
to 
Prime 
Minister nominated by the 
Prime Minister.   . 
Prime 
Minister/ 
*[**] 
**ii.(a) 
Posting 
of 
government 
servants of BPS 21 and 
above. 
To be processed through the 
Establishment Division. 
Prime 
Minister/ 
*[**] 
(b) 
Posting of  government 
servants of BPS 20 
— 
Establishment 
Secretary 
(c) 
Posting of  government 
servants of BPS 17 to 19 
To be processed in the 
Ministry/Division concerned. 
Secretary 
of 
Ministry/Division 
concerned. 
(d) 
Posting 
of 
government 
servants in BPS 16 and 
below. 
To be processed by the 
Department concerned. 
Heads 
of 
Departments. 
iii.(a) 
Appointment to posts in 
Management Grades other 
than 
of 
a 
Finance 
Member/Director and those 
covered by (i) and (ii) above. 
Selection Board headed by 
the 
Secretary 
of 
the 
Ministry/Division 
concer-
ned 
to 
consider 
and 
recommend from a panel of  
three 
names 
for 
each 
vacancy.  
Prime 
Minister/ 
*[**] 
  **(b) 
Appointments 
to 
posts 
carrying a minimum pay 
equal to the minimum of 
BPS 20 and above. 
Selection Board headed by 
the Secretary of the Ministry/ 
Division 
concerned 
to 
consider 
and 
recommend 
Minister Incharge 
                                                          
 Omitted & Subs. vide Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No. 6/4/96-R.3, dated 14-09-2018. 
** Amended vide Estt. Division OM No. 6/4/96-R.3, dated 26.5.2000. 

CHAPTER-04                       ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 461 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of Case 
Selection Procedure 
Approving 
Authority 
from a panel of three names 
for each vacancy. 
iv. 
Appointment of Heads of 
Subsidiary Companies not 
included in Management 
Grade. 
Selection Board headed by 
Secretary of the Ministry/ 
Division 
concerned 
and 
recommend from a panel of 
three 
names 
for 
each 
vacancy. 
Minister Incharge 
 
v. 
Appointment to posts other 
than those mentioned above. 
Through appropriate Select-
ion Board set up in the 
Organization. 
An 
Officer 
authorized 
by 
Head 
of 
the 
Organization 
concerned. 
 
2. 
This procedure shall be applicable, mutatis mutandis, for selections for these 
posts from the open market. 
 
3. 
The constitution of Selection Boards for posts mentioned at Serial Numbers 
(i), (ii), (iii) and (iv) of para 1 shall be subject to the approval of the Prime Minister/[**] 
through Establishment Division (unless already so approved). The constitution of the 
Selection Board at Sr. No. (v) of para 1 shall be approved by the Minister Incharge of the 
Ministry/Division concerned.     
 
4.  
In case where the services of any government servant are required for posting 
on 
deputation 
in 
any 
autonomous/semi-autonomous 
body, 
the 
administrative 
Ministry/Division concerned shall propose a panel of at least three names through the 
Establishment Division in case where the Prime Minister/**[**] is the competent authority.     
 
5. 
Appointment to the post of Member(Finance), Director (Finance) or the 
Chief Finance Officer in any autonomous/semi-autonomous body irrespective of the 
designation shall be made with the approval of the Prime Minister/**[**] in case the post is 
in BPS 20, equivalent or above.  However, for these posts in BPS 19/equivalent the 
government‘s approval will be accorded by the Finance Secretary in consultation with the 
Establishment Secretary. 
 
[6.  All appointments approved by the President or the Chief Executive/Prime 
Minister shall be notified by the Establishment Division.  Posting of officers of BPS 20 in 
autonomous and semi-autonomous bodies will also be notified by the Establishment 
Division. The terms and conditions of deputation to autonomous bodies shall be regulated by 
the prescribed standard terms and conditions of deputation.  Any deviation from the standard 
terms and conditions of deputation shall require prior approval of Finance and Establishment 
Divisions].   
                                                          
 Amended vide Estt. Division‘s OM No. 6/4/96-R.3, dated 06.06.2002. 
 Omitted & Subs. vide Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No. 6/4/96-R.3, dated 14-09-2018. 
 Subs. vide Establishment Division‘s O.M.No.6/4/96-R.3, dated 10-4-2002. 

Page - 462                     ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-04 
 
 
 
7. 
In cases where these instructions are in conflict with the provisions of the 
laws governing any corporation, the provision of the law to the extent of conflict shall 
prevail.     
 
8. 
Establishment Division‘s U.O.No.1/85/94-E.6, dated the 5th May, 1996 
regarding ban on promotion in corporations, is hereby cancelled. 
[Authority.– Establishment Division‘s O.M.No.6/4/96-R.3,  dated 10-5-1997]. 
 
16.3 Unauthorized Assignment of the Charge of the Posts of Secretary/ 
Additional Secretary/Head of Departments /Organizations 
 
Refer to the subject noted above and to state that it has been noted that Ministries/ 
Divisions as a stop-gap arrangement assign the charge of the posts of Secretary/Additional 
Secretary/Head of Departments/Organizations, functioning, under their administrative 
control, at their own level without the formal approval of the competent authority, which is 
a violation of Rule 6 of the Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) 
Rules,1973 and Establishment Division‘s instructions circulated vide O.M No. 6/4/96-R-3 
dated 10-05-1997. Such a practice is not only a grave violation of rules but also reflects on 
an Adhoc system of management.  
[Authority.– Establishment Division‘s O.M.No.43/02/2016-E-1,  dated 23-09-2016]. 
 
16.4 Cases to be Submitted to the  
Prime Minister for his Orders 
 
The Prime Minister has observed that most of the Ministries/Divisions in cases to 
be submitted to the Prime Minister for his orders, such as extension in Current 
Charge/Additional Charge appointments etc., tend to initiate fresh and separate summaries 
for the Prime Minister rather than submitting such cases in continuation of earlier summary 
in terms of instructions of Secretariat Manual.  
 
2. 
Attention of all Ministries/Divisions is invited for guidance and strict 
compliance to the detailed office procedure prescribed in Secretariat Instructions on the 
subject matter in para-49 of the Appendix ―E‖ of the Secretariat Instruction No.70. It is 
informed that Establishment Division shall only process those cases for orders of the Prime 
Minister fully complying with the Government instructions and prescribed procedure.  
[Authority.– Establishment Division‘s O.M.No.52/02/2016-E-1,  dated 17-11-2016]. 
__________________ 

 
 
CHAPTER 5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE REVISED LEAVE RULES 
(463-464) 
 
 
 
 

 CHAPTER-5             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 465          
 
 
CHAPTER 5 
 
THE REVISED LEAVE RULES 
 
 
  Sl. 
No(s). 
CONTENTS 
Page   
No(s). 
1 
Revised Leave Rules, 1980 .............................................................................
467-481 
2 
Explanatory Instructions For Filling Up The Leave Account Form ....
482-483 
 
3.1 
Clarification of Withdrawal of Request of LPR/Retirement 
after Sanction/Notification .....................................................................
483-484 
 
3.2 
Further Clarification of Withdrawal of Request of LPR/ 
Retirement After Sanction/Notification ...........................................
484 
 
3.3 
Option for Encashment of LPR .......................................................
484-485 
 
3.4 
Encashment of LPR on Premature Retirement ....................................
485-486 
 
3.5 
Encashment of L.P.R ...........................................................................
486 
 
3.6 
Encashment of L.P.R (Clarification) ...............................................
486 
 
3.7 
Encashment of LPR/Amendment in the Revised Leave Rules 
1980 in Respect of Leave Encashment/Grant of Encashment of 
LPR for 365 Days Instead of 180 Days ...........................................
486-487 
 
 
4.1 
Permission To Seek Private Employment by Civil Servants  
During LPR Within Two Years of Retirement ...........................
487-488 
 
4.2 
Arrangements for providing substitutes for officers proceeding 
on L.P.R...........................................................................................
489 
 
5.1 
Special Instructions Relevant To Leave of  Civil Servants:  
 Absence from Headquarters .........................................................
489 
 
5.2 
Leaving Headquarters During Holidays or Casual Leave ...............
489 
 
5.3 
Bar against leaving place of duty without waiting for sanction of 
leave ................................................................................................
489 
 
5.4 
Procedure For Grant of Leave To High Officials and to the 
Officers Belonging to Groups/Services/ Cadres Controlled by 
the Establishment Division ..............................................................
490 
6 
Grant of Leave to Government Servants for the Period Spent in 
Giving Evidence Otherwise than on Behalf of the State in a Criminal/ 
Civil Case not Connected with their Official Duties ....................................
491 
 
7.1 
Grant of Leave to Officers Transferred to Other Posts ..................
491 
 
7.2 
Sanction and Notification of Leave of Officers Transferred to 
Other Posts ...........................................................................................
491 
 
8.1 
Grant of Extraordinary Leave (Leave Without Pay) under 
 
Rule 9 of the Revised Leave Rules, 1980 ...........................................
491 
 
8.2 
Grant of EOL Without Pay and Conversion of EOL into 
Another Kind of Leave ....................................................................
492 
 

Page - 466             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                     CHAPTER-5              
 
 
  Sl. 
No(s). 
CONTENTS 
Page   
No(s). 
 
8.3 
Employment of Government Servants with International 
Organizations, Foreign Governments on the Basis of Leave 
DUE/EOL ........................................................................................
495 
9 
Grant of Special Leave to Khuddam-ul-Hajjaj ......................................
493 
 
10.1 
Leave Reserve under the Section Officers' Scheme and its  
 
Proper Utilization................................................................................
493-494 
 
10.2 
Leave Reserve Section .........................................................................
494 
 
10.3 
Utilization of Leave Reserve Section ..............................................
494-495 
 
10.4 
Filling-up of Vacancies on Proceeding of Section Officers on 
LPR .................................................................................................
495 
 
10.5 
Leave and Training Reserve ............................................................
495-496 
 
11.1 
Grant of Study Leave Outside Pakistan ......................................
496 
 
11.2 
Study Leave for L.L.M. (Shariah and Law) Courses of Islamic 
University Islamabad .......................................................................
496 
 
11.3 
Study Leave Rules Prescribed by the President (F.R. 84) ...................
497-500 
 
12.1 
Casual Leave – Grant of Maximum Leave at a Time .....................
500 
 
12.2 
Grant of Casual Leave at a Time .........................................................
500-501 
 
12.3 
Spreading of Casual Leave Over Two Years .......................................
501 
 
12.4 
Combination of Casual Leave with Holidays ......................................
501 
 
12.5 
Procedure for Grant of Casual Leave to the Secretaries to the 
Government and Heads of Departments ..............................................
501-502 
 
12.6 
Procedure for Grant of Casual Leave to Secretaries ............................
502 
 
12.7 
Grant of Casual Leave to Heads of Departments and Subordinate 
Offices ..................................................................................................
502-503 
 
12.8 
Absence from Office Due to Curfew to be treated as Casual Leave ...
503 
 
12.9 
Grant of Casual Leave Ex-Pakistan .....................................................
503 
 
12.10 Grant of Casual Leave to Government Servants Deputed Abroad ......
504 
 
12.11 Grant of Leave to Officers in BPS-22 other than Secretaries and 
Heads of Departments in BPS-22 ....................................................
504 
 
13.1 
Grant of Leave to Secretaries, Heads of Departments and  
 
Heads 
of 
Autonomous/Semi-Autonomous 
Bodies/ 
 
Corporations ..................................................................................
504-505 
 
13.2 
Grant of Leave to Secretaries, Heads of Departments and Heads 
of Autonomous Bodies ....................................................................
505-506 
14 
Expeditious Processing of Cases Where a Medical Authority 
Certified that a Government Servant is Permanently Incapacitated 
for Service .................................................................................................
506 
15 
Employment of Government Servants with NGOs or Private 
Organization within Pakistan ..................................................................
506 
_______________ 
 

 CHAPTER-5             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 467          
 
 
CHAPTER 05 
THE REVISED LEAVE RULES 
Sl.No. 1 
Revised Leave Rules, 1980 
 
In exercise of the powers conferred by section 25 of the Civil Servants Act, 1973 
(LXXI of 1973), the President is pleased to make the following rules, namely:- 
 
1.   
Short title, application and commencement.– (1) These rules may be 
called the Revised Leave Rules, 1980. 
 
(2)  They shall apply to all civil servants other than those who were employed 
before the first day of July, 1978, and opted not to be governed by the Revision of Leave 
Rules issued under the Finance Division's Office Memorandum No.F.1(2)-Rev.I/78, dated 
the 21st September, 1978. 
 
(3)  They shall come into force at once. 
 
2.  
When leave earned.– (1) All service rendered by a civil servant qualifies 
him to earn leave in accordance with these rules but shall not be earned during the period of 
leave. 
 
(2)  Any period spent by a civil servant in foreign service qualifies him to earn 
leave provided that contribution towards leave salary is paid to the Government on account 
of such period. 
 
3.  
Earning and Accumulation of leave.– (1) A civil servant shall earn leave 
only on full pay which shall be calculated at the rate of four days for every calendar month of 
the period of duty rendered and credited to the leave account as "Leave on Full Pay", duty 
period of fifteen days or less in a calendar month being ignored and those of more than 
fifteen days being treated as a full calendar month for the purpose. 
 
(2)  If a civil servant proceeds on leave during a calendar month and returns from 
it during another calendar month and the period of duty in either month is more than fifteen 
days, the leave to be credited for both the incomplete months shall be restricted to that 
admissible for one full calendar month only. 
 
3.  
There shall be no maximum limit on the accumulation of such leave. 
 
4.  
Civil Servants in Vacation Department.– A civil servant in vacation 
department may earn leave on full pay:— 
 
(a) 
When he avails himself of full vacation in a calendar year                 at the 
rate of one day for every calendar month of duty rendered; 
 
(b) 
When during any year he is prevented from availing himself of the full 
vacation                   as for a civil servant in a non-vacation department for 
that year; and 
 
(c) 
When he avails himself of only a part of the vacation               as in (a) above 
plus such proportion of thirty days as the number of days of vacation not 
taken bears to the full vacation. 

Page - 468             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                     CHAPTER-5              
 
 
5.   
Leave on full pay.– The maximum period of leave on full pay that may be 
granted at one time shall be as follows:– 
 
(a)  Without medical certificate.......  
120 days 
 
(b) 
With medical certificate..........  
180 days 
 
 
 
 
plus 
 
(c) 
On medical certificate  
 
 
from leave account in  
 
 
entire service.............  
 
365 days 
 
Note.– Under the Prescribed Leave Rules, 1955, leave on half average pay could be 
converted into leave on full pay on the strength of Medical Certificate upto a maximum of 
twelve months in terms of leave on full pay in the whole service. The account of this kind of 
leave was separately maintained in column 14 (a) of the leave account under the said Rules. 
Such leave availed of by the civil servants before the introduction of these rules, shall be 
debited against the maximum limit of 365 days fixed under this rule. 
 
6.  
Leave on Half Pay.– (1) Leave on full pay may, at the option of the civil 
servant, be converted into leave on half pay, the debit to the leave account will be at the rate 
of one day of the former for every two days of the latter, fraction of one-half counting as one 
full day's leave on full pay. 
 
(2)  The request for conversion of leave referred to in sub-rule (1) shall be 
specified by the civil servant in his application for the grant of leave. 
 
(3)  There shall be no limit on the grant of leave on half pay so long as it is 
available by conversion in the leave account. 
 
7.  
Leave to be Applied, etc., in Terms of Days.– Leave shall be applied for, 
expressed, and sanctioned, in terms of days. 
 
8.  
Carry Forward of Existing Leave.– All leaves at credit in the account of a 
civil servant on the first day of July, 1978, shall be carried forward and expressed in terms of 
leave on full pay and the leave account in such cases shall, with effect from the first day of 
July, 1978, or, in the case of a civil servant who was on leave on that date, with effect from 
the date of his return from leave, be recast as under:— 
 
(i) 
Leave on average pay: 
 
(a) 
1 month......................  
30 days 
 
(b) 
1 day.......................... 
1 day 
 
(ii) 
Leave on half average pay: 
 
(a) 
1 month....................... 
15 days 
 
(b)  
2 days ........................ 
1 day 
 
Note.– Fractions, if any, shall be ignored. 
 
9.  
Extraordinary leave (leave without pay).– (1) Extraordinary leave without 
pay may be granted on any ground upto a maximum period of five years at a time; provided 
that the civil servant to whom such leave is granted has been in continuous service for a period 
of not less than ten years, and, in case a civil servant has not completed ten years of 
continuous service, extraordinary leave without pay for a maximum period of two years may 
be granted at the discretion of the head of his office: 

 CHAPTER-5             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 469          
 
 
 
Provided that the maximum period of five years shall be reduced by the period of 
leave on full pay or half pay, if granted in combination with the extraordinary leave. 
 
(2)  
Extraordinary leave upto a maximum period prescribed under sub- 
rule (1) may be granted, subject to the conditions stated therein, irrespective of the fact 
whether a civil servant is a permanent or a temporary employee. 
 
*(3)  Extraordinary leave may be granted retrospectively in lieu of absence without 
leave. 
 
10.   Recreation leave.– Recreation leave may be granted for fifteen days once in a 
calendar year, the debit to the leave account may, however, be for ten days leave on full pay: 
 
Provided that such leave shall not be admissible to a civil servant in a vacation 
department. 
 
11.  Leave not due.– (1) Leave not due may be granted on full pay, to  be offset 
against leave to  be  earned in future, for a maximum period of three hundred and sixty-five 
days in the entire period of service, subject to the condition that during the first five years of 
service it shall not exceed ninety days in all. 
 
(2)  
Such leave may be converted into leave on half pay. 
 
(3) 
Such leave shall be granted only when there are reasonable chances of the 
civil servant resuming duty on the expiry of the leave. 
 
(4) 
Such leave shall be granted sparingly and to the satisfaction of the sanctioning 
authority. **[   ]. 
 
12.  Special leave.– (1) A female civil servant, on the death of her husband, may be 
granted special leave on full pay, when applied for a period not exceeding one hundred and 
thirty days. 
 
(2)  Such leave shall not be debited to her leave account. 
 
(3)  Such leave shall commence from the date of death of her husband and for 
this purpose she will have to produce death certificate issued by the competent authority 
either alongwith her application for special leave or, if that is not possible, the said certificate 
may be furnished to the leave sanctioning authority separately. 
 
13.  Maternity leave.– (1) Maternity leave may be granted on full pay, outside 
the leave account, to a female civil servant to the extent of ninety days in all from the date of 
its commencement or forty-five days from the date of her confinement, whichever be earlier. 
 
(2)  Such leave may not be granted for more than three times in the entire service 
of a female civil servant except in the case of a female civil servant employed in a vacation 
department who may be granted maternity leave without this restriction. 
 
(3)  For confinements beyond the third one, the female civil servant would have 
to take leave from her normal leave account. 
 
(4)  The spells of maternity leave availed of prior to the coming into force of 
these rules shall be deemed to have been taken under these rules. 
                         
* Added vide Finance Division‘s Notification No. F.1(45)-R 4/81, dated 13-2-1982. 
** Omitted vide Finance Division‘s Notification No. S.R.O. 218(KE)/93, dated 24-10-1993.  

Page - 470             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                     CHAPTER-5              
 
 
(5)  Maternity leave may be granted in continuation of, or in combination with, 
any other kind of leave including extraordinary leave as may be due and admissible to a 
female civil servant. 
 
 (6)  Leave salary to be paid during maternity leave shall be regulated, as for other 
leave, in accordance with the formula contained in the Finance Division‘s O.M No.F.9(16)- 
R.1/69, dated the 26th July, 1969, read with its O.M of even number dated the 28th  
November, 1969. 
 
(7)  The leave salary to be paid during maternity leave will, therefore, remain un-
affected even if an increment accrues during such leave and the effect of such an increment 
will be given after the expiry of maternity leave. 
 
14.  Disability Leave.– (1) Disability leave may be granted, outside the leave 
account on each occasion, upto a maximum of seven hundred and twenty days on such 
medical advice as the head of office may consider necessary, to a civil servant, other than a 
seaman or a civil servant in part-time service, disabled by injury, ailment or disease 
contacted in course or in consequence of duty or official position. 
 
(2)  The leave salary during disability leave shall be equal to full pay for the first 
one hundred and eighty days and on half pay of the remaining period. 
 
15.  Leave Ex-Pakistan.– (1) Leave ex-Pakistan may be granted on full pay to a 
civil servant who applies for such leave or who proceeds abroad during leave, or takes leave 
while posted abroad or is otherwise on duty abroad, and makes a specific request to that effect. 
 
(2)  The leave pay to be drawn abroad shall be restricted to a maximum of three 
thousand rupees per month. 
 
(3)  The leave pay shall be payable in Sterling if such leave is spent in Asia other 
than Pakistan and India. 
 
(4)  Such leave pay shall be payable for the actual period of leave spent abroad 
subject to a maximum of one hundred and twenty days at a time. 
 
(5)  The civil servants appointed after the 17th May, 1958, shall draw their leave 
salary in rupees in Pakistan irrespective of the country where they spend their leave. 
 
(6)  Leave ex-Pakistan will be regulated and be subject to the same limits and 
conditions as prescribed in rules 5, 6 and 9. 
 
16.  Leave preparatory to retirement.– (1) The maximum period upto which a 
civil servant may be granted leave preparatory to retirement shall be three hundred and 
sixty-five days. 
 
(2)  Such leave may be taken, subject to availability, either on full pay, or partly 
on full pay and partly on half pay, or entirely on half pay, at the discretion of the civil 
servant. 
 
*[(3)  An officer of BPS-21 or BPS-22 who, on or after the 19th  day of February, 
1991, opts to retire voluntarily after he has completed twenty-five years of service qualifying 
for pension may be granted leave preparatory to retirement equal to entire leave at his credit 
                         
*Added vide Finance Division‘s O.M. No. F.1(8)-R.4/89, dated 30-5-1991. 

 CHAPTER-5             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 471          
 
 
in his leave account on full pay or till the date on which he completes the sixtieth years of his 
age, whichever is earlier: 
 
Provided that such officer shall not be entitled to conversion of leave preparatory to 
retirement on full pay under rule 6 into leave on half pay]. 
 
*[17. Encashment of refused leave preparatory to retirement.– (1) If in case of 
retirement on superannuation or voluntary retirement on completion of thirty years 
qualifying service a civil servant cannot for reasons of public service, be granted leave 
preparatory to retirement duly applied for in sufficient time, he will in lieu thereof be granted 
lump-sum leave pay for the leave refused to him subject to a maximum of [three hundred 
and sixty five  days leave on full pay]]. 
 
(2)  Such leave can be refused partly and sanctioned partly but the cash 
compensation shall be admissible for the actual period of such leave so refused not 
exceeding ***[three hundred and sixty five days]. 
 
(3)  The payment of leave pay in lieu of such refused leave may be made to the 
civil servant either in lump-sum at the time of retirement or may, at his option, be drawn by 
him month-wise for the period of leave so refused. 
 
(4)  For the purpose of lump-sum payment in lieu of such leave, only the "Senior 
Post Allowance" will be included in "Leave Pay" so admissible. 
 
(5)  In case a civil servant on leave preparatory to retirement dies before 
completing **[three hundred and sixty five days] of such leave, his family shall be entitled to 
lump-sum payment equal to the period falling short of *[three hundred and sixty five days]. 
 
18. Power to refuse leave preparatory to retirement, etc.– (1) Ordinarily, leave 
preparatory to retirement shall not be refused. 
 
(2)  All orders refusing leave preparatory to retirement to a civil servant and 
recalling a civil servant from leave preparatory to retirement shall be passed only by the 
authorities specified below: 
 
[(i)  
For civil servants of BPS-20 
@Chief Executive  
 
 
and above. 
 
 
 
    
(ii)  
For civil servants   
 
Appointing Authority 
 
 
in BPS-17 to 19  
 
prescribed in rule 6 of the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Civil Servants (Appointment, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Promotion and Transfer) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rules, 1973; and 
 
(iii) 
For civil servants in BPS-16 
As above in (ii).] 
 
 
and below 
                         
* Subs. vide Finance Division‘s Notification No. SRO 281(I)86, dated 10-3-1986. 
 Subs.vide Finance Division (Regulation Wing) Notification No.SRO 70(KE)/2012 dated 29-8-2012. 
 Subs. vide Finance Division‘s Notification No.F.1(2)/R.4/2000 dated 21-2-2001. 
@ Now Prime Minister 

Page - 472             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                     CHAPTER-5              
 
 
 (3)   The authorities specified in sub-rule (2) shall not delegate these powers to any 
other authority. 
 
[(4) 
All proposals regarding refusal of Leave Preparatory to Retirement to the 
Officers in BPS-17 and above shall be submitted to the respective appointing authorities 
with detailed justification at least three months before the officer is due to proceed on 
such leave]. 
 
 
[18-A.  Encashment of leave preparatory to retirement.– (1) A civil servant 
may fifteen months before the date of superannuation or thirty years qualifying service on or 
after the 1st July, 1983, at his option, be allowed to encash his leave preparatory to 
retirement if he undertakes in writing to perform duty in lieu of the whole period of three 
hundred and sixty-five days or lesser period which is due and admissible]. 
 
[Provided that a civil servant who does not exercise the option within the 
specified period shall be deemed to have opted for encashment of LPR]. This amendment 
shall be effective from the 5th March, 1990. 
 
@Provided further that a civil servant appointed or posted as Officer on Special 
Duty with or without an assignment of duty, shall be deemed to have performed duties in 
lieu of the period of LPR within the meaning of this rule. 
 
@@[(2) In lieu of such leave, leave pay may be claimed for the actual period of such 
leave subject to a maximum of @@@[three hundred and sixty five days]. 
 
 @@@[(2A) Encashment of leave preparatory to retirement (LPR) not exceeding 
three hundred and sixty five days shall be effective from the first day of July,2012 and shall, 
for the entire period of leave refused or opted for encashment, be applicable to a civil servant 
retired or, as the case may be, retiring on or after the first day of July,2012, provided such 
leave is available at his credit subject to a maximum of three hundred and sixty five days.  
 
(2B) The encashment of LPR shall also be applicable to employees of the 
autonomous and semi-autonomous bodies under Administrative control of the Federal 
Government which have adopted basic pay scales scheme and these rules in toto]. 
 
@@@[(3) If at any time during such period, leave is granted on account of ill health 
supported by medical certificate or for performance of Hajj, the amount of cash 
compensation on account of leave pay shall be reduced by an amount equal to the leave pay 
for the period of leave so granted]. 
 
(4)  The civil servant shall submit the option to the authority competent to 
sanction leave preparatory to retirement, who shall accept the option and issue formal 
sanction for the payment of cash compensation. 
                         
 Subs. vide Finance Division‘s Notification No.F.1(2)/R.4/2000 dated 21-2-2001. 
 Subs. vide Finance Division‘s Notification No. F.1(73)-R.4/84, dated 18-12-1984. 
 Added vide Finance Division‘s Notification No. F.1(1)-R-4/90-320, dated 11-3-1990.       
@ Added vide Finance Division (Regs. Wing) SRO No. (1)/2007, dated 27.10.2007. 
@@ Subs. vide Finance Division‘s Notification No. SRO 1022 (I)/85 dated 14-10-1985. 
@@@ Added and Subs. vide Finance Division‘s Notification No. S.R.O. 70(KE)/2012, dated 29-8-2012. 

 CHAPTER-5             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 473          
 
 
 
 [(5)  For the purpose of payment in lieu of such leave.– 
 
(a) 
the rate of  pay shall be the rate admissible [at the time the leave pay is 
drawn], 
 
(b) 
the leave pay may be drawn at any time for the period for which duty has 
already been rendered; and 
 
(c) 
only the "Senior Post-Allowance" will be included in the leave pay as 
admissible]. 
 
[(6) Leave pay for the purpose of encashment of LPR shall be computed on the 
basis of pay and allowances reckonable towards pension as shown in the last 
pay certificate of a civil servant.] 
 
 
19.  In-service death, etc.– (1) In case a civil servant dies, or is declared 
permanently incapacitated for further service by a Medical Board, while in service, a 
lump-sum payment equal to leave pay upto @[three hundred and sixty five days] out of the 
leave at his credit shall be made to his family as defined for the purposes of family pension 
or, as the case may be, to the civil servant. 
 
(2)  
For the purpose of lump-sum payment under sub-rule (1), only the "Senior 
Post Allowance" will be included in the leave pay" so admissible". 
 
20.  Reasons need not be specified, etc.– (1) It shall not be necessary to specify 
the reasons for which leave has been applied so long as that leave is due and admissible to a 
civil servant. 
 
(2)  Leave applied for on medical certificate shall not be refused: 
 
Provided that the authority competent to sanction leave may, at its discretion, 
secure a second medical opinion by requesting the Civil Surgeon or Medical Board, as the 
case may be, to have the applicant medically examined. 
 
21.  Leave when starts and ends.– Instead of indicating whether leave starts or 
ends in the forenoon or afternoon, leave may commence from that day following that on 
which a civil servant hands over the charge of his post and may end on the day preceding 
that on which he resumes duty. 
 
22.  Recall from leave, etc.– (1) If a civil servant is recalled to duty compulsorily 
with the personal approval of the head of his office from leave of any kind that he is 
spending away from his headquarters, he may be granted a single return fare plus daily 
allowance as admissible on tour from the station where he is spending his leave to the place 
where he is required to report for duty. 
                         
 Subs. vide Finance Division‘s Notification No. F.(1)73-R-4/84 dated 12-03-1986. 
 Added vide Finance Division‘s  Notification No. S.R.O. 70(KE)/2012, dated 29-8-2012. 
 Amended vide Finance Division‘s  Notification No. F.I (34) R-4/85, dated 16-9-1985, effective from the date 
of issue. 
@ Subs. vide Finance Division‘s  Notification No. S.R.O No. 11(KE)/2013 dated 18-02-2013. 

Page - 474             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                     CHAPTER-5              
 
 
(2)  In case the civil servant is recalled to duty at headquarters and his remaining 
leave is cancelled, the fare then admissible shall be for one way journey only. 
 
(3)  If the return from leave is optional, the civil servant is entitled to no 
concession. 
 
23.  Overstayal after sanctioned leave, etc.– (1) Unless the leave of a civil 
servant is extended by the head of his office, a civil servant who remains absent after the end 
of his leave shall not be entitled to any remuneration for the period of such absence, and 
without prejudice to any disciplinary action that may be taken against him, double the period 
of such absence shall be debited against his leave account. 
 
(2)  Such debit shall, if there is insufficient credit in the leave account, be adjusted 
against future earning. 
 
24.  Any type of leave may be applied.– A civil servant may apply for the type of 
leave which is due and admissible to him and it shall not be refused on the ground that another 
type of leave should be taken in the particular circumstances, for example, a civil servant may 
apply for extraordinary leave or leave on half pay even if leave on full pay is otherwise due 
and admissible to him, or he may, proceed on extraordinary leave followed by leave on half 
pay and full pay rather than that on full pay, half pay, and without pay. 
 
25.  Combination of different types of leave, etc.– One type of leave may be 
combined with joining time or with any other type of leave otherwise admissible to the civil 
servant: 
 
Provided that leave preparatory to retirement shall not be combined with any other 
kind of leave. 
 
26.  Civil servant on leave not to join duty without permission before its 
expiry.– Unless he is permitted to do so by the authority which sanctioned his leave, a civil 
servant on leave may not return to duty before the expiry of the period of leave granted to him. 
 
27.  Leave due may be granted on abolition of post, etc.– (1) When a post is 
abolished, leave due to the civil servant, whose services are terminated in consequence 
thereof, shall be granted without regard to the availability of a post for the period of leave. 
 
(2)  The grant of leave in such cases shall, so long as he does not attain the age of 
superannuation, be deemed automatically to have also extended the duration of the post and 
the tenure of its incumbent. 
 
28.  Manner of handing over charge when proceeding on leave, etc.– (1) A 
civil servant proceeding on leave shall hand over the charge of his post, and if he is in 
Grade-16 and above, he shall, while handing over charge of the post sign the charge 
relinquishment report. 
 
(2)  If leave ex-Pakistan has been sanctioned on medical grounds, the civil 
servants shall take abroad with him a copy of the medical statement of his case. 
 
29.  Assumption of charge on return from leave, etc.– (1) A civil servant, on 
return from leave, shall report for duty to the authority that sanctioned his leave and assume 
                         
 Now BPS. 

 CHAPTER-5             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 475          
 
 
charge of the post to which he is directed by that authority unless such direction has been 
given to him in advance. 
 
(2)  In case he is directed to take charge of a post at a station other than that from 
where he proceeded on leave, travel expenses as on transfer shall be payable to him. 
 
30.  Account offices to maintain leave account.– (1) Leave account in respect of 
a civil servant shall be maintained as part of his service book. 
 
(2)  The accounts offices shall maintain the leave accounts of civil servants of 
whom they were maintaining the accounts immediately before the coming into force of these 
rules. 
 
31. Leave to lapse when civil servant quits service.– All leaves at the credit of a 
civil servant shall lapse when he quits service. 
 
32.  Pay during leave.– (1) Leave pay admissible during leave on full pay shall 
be the greater of:– 
 
(a) 
the average monthly pay earned during the twelve complete months 
immediately preceding the month in which the leave begins; and 
 
(b) 
the rate equal to the rate of pay drawn on the day immediately before the 
beginning of the leave. 
 
(2)  When leave on half pay is taken, the amounts calculated under clauses (a) 
and (b) of sub-rule (1) shall be halved to determine the greater of the two rates. 
 
*[(3)  A civil servant shall be entitled to the leave pay at the revised rate of pay if a 
general revision in pay of civil servants takes place or an annual increment occurs during the 
period of leave of the civil servant]. 
 
33.  Departmental leave.– (1) Departmental leave may be granted to civil 
servants drawing pay in Grade 1 to 9 in the National Pay Scale and serving in the Survey of 
Pakistan or in any such other department as may be notified by the Finance Division on the 
conditions laid down in this rule. 
 
(2)  Departmental leave may be granted only to a civil servant whose services are 
temporarily not required and no leave other than leave-not-due is admissible. 
 
(3)  A subsistence allowance at such rate as the officer granting the leave may 
think fit but not exceeding half pay may be granted during departmental leave. 
 
(4)  The allowance shall be payable only on return to and resumption of duty after 
the expiration of the leave, whether taken by itself or combined with departmental leave 
without pay: 
 
Provided that if a civil servant dies while on departmental leave, the amount of 
allowance, if any, otherwise admissible upto date of his death shall be paid to his heirs. 
 
(5)  Departmental leave with subsistence allowance may be granted during the 
recess by the head of the party or office to which the civil servant belongs only when the 
                         
*Added vide Finance Division‘s Notification No. F.1(6)R-4/93, dated 21-9-1994. 

Page - 476             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                     CHAPTER-5              
 
officer granting the leave considers it desirable to re-employ him in the ensuing field season 
and the leave so granted may, in special cases, be extended by the Surveyor-General upto a 
maximum of five hundred and forty days at a time. 
 
(6)  Departmental leave with subsistence allowance may be granted at times other 
than the recess for not more than one hundred and eighty days at a time by a Director or 
Deputy Director, Survey of Pakistan, provided such leave is granted in the interest of public 
service or work and not at the civil servant's own request. 
 
(7)  Leave granted may in special cases be extended by the Surveyor-General 
upto a maximum of three hundred and sixty five days at a time. 
 
(8)  Leave on medical certificate shall in no circumstances be regarded as granted 
in the interest of public service or work. 
 
(9)  Departmental leave without pay may be granted by the Surveyor-General in 
continuation of departmental leave with subsistence allowance in special cases as authorized 
by the Finance Division by a general or special order. 
 
(10)  When a civil servant holds a post in which the Surveyor-General considers 
that he is unlikely to be eligible for departmental leave in future, the Surveyor-General may, 
by special orders in writing, declare that, with effect from such date not being earlier than the 
civil servant's last return from departmental leave, as the Surveyor-General may fix, any 
balance of leave at debit in the civil servant's leave account shall be cancelled, and all leave 
earned after such date will be credited as due in the civil servant's leave account, and all 
leave taken after such date, including departmental leave with allowances, if any, will be 
debited to it. 
  
(11)  Departmental leave may be combined with any other kind of leave which may 
be due. 
 
34.  Sick leave to a seaman.– A civil servant serving as an officer, warrant 
officer or petty officer on a government vessel may, while undergoing medical treatment for 
sickness or injury, either on his vessel or in hospital, be granted leave on full pay, outside his 
leave account, for a period not exceeding forty-five days by the master or the captain of the 
vessel provided that the civil servant is not malingering or his ill health is not due to such of 
his own action as cause or aggravate disease or injury. 
 
35.  Leave to disabled seaman.– A civil servant referred to in rule 34 who is 
disabled while performing his duty may be allowed leave on full pay for a maximum period 
not exceeding ninety days on each occasion if:- 
 
(a) 
the disability is duly certified by a government Medical Officer, 
 
(b) 
the disability is not due to the civil servant's own carelessness, and 
 
(c) 
the vacancy caused by his absence is not filled up. 
 
36.  Leave 
earned 
by 
civil 
servant 
employed 
in 
non-continuous 
establishment.– (1) A civil servant employed in a non-continuous establishment may be 
granted only earned leave and disability leave as admissible to, and subject to the conditions 
laid down for, a civil servant employed in a continuous establishment and no other kind of 
leave shall be admissible to such civil servant. 

 CHAPTER-5             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 477          
 
 
 
(2)  A civil servant who is transferred from a non-continuous establishment to a 
continuous establishment and vice versa shall carry forward the balance of earned leave at 
his credit on the date of his transfer. 
 
Explanation.– In this rule, "non-continuous establishment" means an establishment 
which does not function throughout the year and "continuous establishment" means an 
establishment which functions throughout the year. 
 
37.  Quarantine leave.– (1) Quarantine leave is in the nature of extra casual 
leave and a substitute shall normally not be employed during the absence of civil servant on 
such leave: 
 
Provided that where the exigencies of service are compelling, the head of the office 
may employ a substitute for reasons to be recorded in writing. 
 
(2)  
A civil servant may be granted quarantine leave outside his leave account to 
the extent that his authorized medical attendant recommends and the period of such leave shall 
be treated as duty with full pay and allowances of the post held by him at the time of 
proceeding on leave. 
 
38.  Leave application, its sanction, etc.– (1) Except where otherwise stated, an 
application for leave or for an extension of leave must be made to the head of office where a 
civil servant is employed and, in the case of the head of office, to the next-above 
administrative authority and the extent of leave due and admissible shall be stated in the 
application. 
 
(2)  An audit report shall not be necessary before the leave is sanctioned. 
 
(3)   When a civil servant submits a medical certificate for the grant of leave, it 
shall be by an authorized medical attendant *[or other registered medical practitioner] in the 
form attached to these rules. 
 
*[(3-A). No civil servant who has been granted leave on medical certificate may 
return to duty without first producing a medical certificate of fitness in the form attached to 
these rules.] 
 
(4)  Leave as admissible to a civil servant under these rules may be sanctioned by 
the head of a Ministry, Division, Department, Office or any other officer authorized by him 
to do so and, when so required, leave shall be notified in the official Gazette. 
 
(5)  In cases where all the applications for leave cannot, in the interest of public 
service, be sanctioned to run simultaneously, the authority competent to sanction leave shall, 
in deciding the priority of the applications, consider:- 
 
(i) 
whether, and how many applicants can, for the time being, best be spared; 
 
(ii) 
whether any applicants were last recalled compulsorily from leave; and 
  
(iii) whether any applicants were required to make adjustment in the timing of 
their leave on the last occasion. 
                         
*   Ins. & added vide Finance Division‘s  Notification No. 847-R.4/83, dated 19-11-1983. 

Page - 478             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                     CHAPTER-5              
 
 
39.  Hospital leave and study leave.– Subject to these rules, the provisions 
regarding hospital leave and study leave contained in the Fundamental Rules and 
Supplementary Rules shall apply to the civil servants. 
 
*[40. Relaxation of Rules.– The Federal Government may, in a case of hardship, 
relax all or any of the provision of these Rules: 
 
Provided that such relaxation shall not be less favourable to any benefit available to 
a Civil Servant under these Rules]. 
[Authority:- Finance Div.‘s S.R.O. No.1313(I)/80, dated 20-12-1980, as amended from time to time]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                         
*Added vide Finance Division Notification No. F.1(4)-R.4/92, dated 01-10-1992. 

 CHAPTER-5             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 479          
 
 
Form-I 
 
 
FORM OF MEDICAL CERTIFICATE 
 
Signature of applicant 
 
 
MEDICAL CERTIFICATE FOR CIVIL SERVANTS 
 
RECOMMENDED FOR LEAVE OR EXTENSION 
 
 
 
I,.........................after careful .............................. personal examination of 
the case, hereby certify that ......................... whose signature is given above, is suffering 
from ......... and I consider that a period of absence from duty of ....................... with effect 
from ...................... is absolutely necessary for the restoration of his health. 
 
Dated, the......... 
 
 
 
Government Medical Attendant 
 
**or               
 
Other Registered Medical Practitioner 
 
 
Form-II 
 
[***FORM OF MEDICAL CERTIFICATE OF FITNESS TO RETURN TO DUTY 
 
 
I, .................. do hereby certify that I have carefully examined .............. of the 
.................. department, and find that he has recovered from his illness and is now fit to 
resume duties in Government service. I also certify that before arriving at this decision I 
have examined the original medical certificate(s) and statement(s) of the case (or certified 
copies thereof) on which leave was granted or extended,  and have taken these into 
consideration in arriving at my decision. 
 
Dated, the ......... 
 
 
Government Medical Attendant 
                                                                                                       *or               
 
Other Registered Medical Practitioner] 
 
                         
** Added vide Finance Division‘s O.M No. F.1(22)R.4/82, dated  22-12-1982. 
***Added vide Finance Division‘s Notification  No. 847-R. 4/83 dated 19-11-1983. 

Page - 480             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                     CHAPTER-5              
 
Form-III 
G.F. R.13 
APPLICATION FOR LEAVE 
 
 
Notes.-Items 1 to 9 must be filled in by all applicants. Item 12 applies only in the 
case of Government servants of Grade 16 and above. 
 
1. 
Name of applicant 
2. 
Leave Rules applicable 
3. 
Post held 
4. 
Department or Office 
5.   
Pay 
6. 
House rent allowance, conveyance allowance or other compensatory allowances 
drawn in the present post 
7. 
(a) 
Nature of leave applied for 
 
(b) 
Period of leave in days 
 
(c) 
Date of commencement 
8. 
Particular Rule/Rules under which leave is admissible 
9. 
(a)  
Date of return from Last Leave 
 
(b) 
Nature of leave 
 
(c) 
Period of leave in days 
 
Dated:-_________ 
 
 
Signature of applicant 
 
10.  
Remarks and recommendation of the Controlling Officer 
11.  
Certified that leave applied for is admissible under Rule........and necessary 
conditions are fulfilled. 
 
 
Signature…………….. 
 
Dated                   
    Designation…………..                   
 
 
 
12. 
Report of Audit Officer  
  
 
Dated_________                  
                  
Signature………………. 
 
Designation……………. 
 
13. 
Orders of the sanctioning authority certifying that on the expiry of leave the 
applicant is likely to return to the same post or another post carry the compensatory 
allowances drawn by him 
 
 
Dated                   
Signature……………… 
 
Designation…………… 

 CHAPTER-5             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 481          
 
 
                                                                         FORM-III                                                                FORM A.T.C.8   
 
FORM OF LEAVE ACCOUNT UNDER THE REVISED LEAVE RULES,1980 
[Approved vide Finance Division’s letter No. F.1(3)-Rev.1/78, dated 18-1-1979] 
Leave Account of Mr. /Miss/Mrs.--------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Date of commencement of service-------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Date of attaining the age of superannuation------------(N.B.- Instructions for filling in the form are printed on the reverse). 
 
Government/Department served under 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PERIOD OF DUTY 
Leave earned on full pay @ 4 days for  
each calendar month 
Leave at credit (Column 21+6) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PERIOD 
LEAVE TAKEN 
 
 
 
 
Leave on full pay without medical 
certificate subject to maximum of 
120 days & 365 days in case of LPR 
Leave of full pay on medical  
certificate subject to maximum 
of 180 days.  
Leave on full pay on medical certificate 
subject to a maximum of 365 days in entire 
service  
LEAVE 
ON 
HALF 
PAY 
Recreation leave of 15 days in a year  
but 10 days to be debited.  
LEAVE 
NOT 
DUE 
 
ABSENCE 
Total leave (Columns 10+11+12+ 
14+15+17+19 
Balance on 1-7-1978 return from  
leave  (Cols.7-20) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Remarks 
ATTESTATION 
In terms of half pay 
In terms of full pay 
In terms of half pay 
In terms of full pay 
Actual No. of days 
No. of days debitable (double the  
actual number) 
 
From 
To 
YMD 
Full calen-
dar month 
Days 
Days 
From 
To 
Days 
Days 
Days 
Days 
Days 
Days 
Days 
Days 
Days 
Days 
Days 
Days 
 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 

Page - 482             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                     CHAPTER-5              
 
Sl.No.2 
Explanatory Instructions for Filling Up the Leave Account Form 
 
This leave account will be maintained for all civil servants of the Federal 
Government who were in service on the 1st July, 1978 including those who were on leave 
on that date and have not opted to retain the existing leave rules and all others, who enter 
service on or after 1st July, 1978. 
 
2. 
All leave at credit in the account of a civil servant who was in service on 
the 1st July, 1978 shall be converted in terms of leave on full pay at the following rates:— 
 
(i) 
L.A.P*. 
 
(a) 
1 month ............30 days 
 
(b)  1 day ..........…...1 day 
 
(ii) 
L.H.A.P*. 
 
(a)  
1 month ............15 days 
 
(b)  2 days ........…....1 day 
 
[Fractions if any to be ignored] 
 
3. 
The leave account shall commence with an opening entry "Due on 
1-7-1978" or in the case of a civil servant, who was on leave on 1-7-1978 with effect 
from the date of his return from leave.  For the purpose of computing the leave at credit, 
the service upto 30-6-1978 will be taken into account.  The leave due in terms of leave on 
full pay in days will be noted in Column No. 21. 
 
4. (i) In calculating the leave earned on full pay at the rate of 4 days for every 
calendar month the duty period of 15 days or less in a calendar month 
shall be ignored and those of more than 15 days shall be treated as a full 
calendar month for the purpose. If a civil servant proceeds on leave during 
a calendar month and returns from it during another calendar month and 
the period of duty in either month is more than 15 days, the leave to be 
credited for both the incomplete months will be restricted to that 
admissible for one full calendar month only. There shall be no maximum 
limit on accumulation of this leave. 
(ii) 
The provision in (i) above will not apply to a vacation department. In such 
case, a civil servant may earn leave on full pay  
(a) 
when he avails himself of full vacation in a calendar year 
_________ at the rate of one day for every calendar month of duty 
rendered; 
(b) 
when during any year he is prevented from availing himself of the 
                         
* LAP means Leave on Average Pay, LHAP; Leave on Half Average Pay. 

 CHAPTER-5             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 483          
 
 
full vacation__________ as for a civil servant in a non-vacation 
department for that year; and  
(c) 
when he avails himself of only a part of the vacation 
______________ as in (a) above plus such proportion of thirty days 
as the number of days of vacation not taken bears to the full 
vacation. 
 
5.(a) Leave on full pay may be converted into leave on half pay at the option of 
the civil servant; the debit to the leave account will be at the rate of one 
day of the former for every two days of the latter, fraction of one half 
counting as one full day's leave on full pay. The request for such 
conversion shall be specified by the civil servant in his application for the 
grant of leave. 
 
(b)  There shall be no limit on the grant of leave on half pay so long as it is 
available by conversion in the leave account. 
 
6. 
L.P.R. on full pay will be noted in column No. 10 while that on half pay in 
columns No. 13 and 14. 
 
7. 
Leave not due may be granted on full pay to be offset against leave to be 
earned in future for a maximum period of 365 days in the entire period of service, subject 
to the condition that during the first five years of service it shall not exceed 90 days in all.  
Such leave may be converted into leave on half pay.  It shall be granted only when there 
are reasonable chances of the civil servant resuming duty. 
 
8. 
The grant of Special Leave, Maternity Leave, Disability Leave, 
Extraordinary Leave, payment of leave pay for refused L.P.R. upto a maximum of *180 
days, lump-sum payment equal to full pay upto *180 days out of leave at credit made to 
the family of a government servant, whose death occurs while in service, Seaman Sick 
Leave, Departmental Leave, Study Leave, Hospital Leave and Quarantine Leave shall be 
noted in Column No. 22, Maternity Leave, other than three times in entire service shall, 
however, be debited to the relevant column of the Leave Account. 
 
9. 
When a government servant applies for leave Columns 2 to 7, shall be filled 
in showing the period of duty upto the date preceding that on which a government servant 
intends to go on leave. The full calendar months to be noted in Column 5 shall be worked 
out on the lines indicated in (4) above. 
 
10. 
When a government servant returns from leave, Columns 8 to 23 shall be 
filled according to the nature of leave. If leave not due is availed off the minus balance to 
be shown in Column No. 21 should be written in red ink. 
 
3.1 
Clarification of Withdrawal of Request of  
 
 
LPR/Retirement After Sanction/ Notification 
 
Refer to the correspondence resting with M/o Defence (Defence Division)‘s 
O.M.No.3/25/D-11(CSH)/2006 dated 01-04-2011 on the above subject and to clarify that:- 
i) 
After the withdrawal of Establishment Division‘s O.M No.14/2/2009-R-2 dated 
                         
*Now 365 days. 

Page - 484             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                     CHAPTER-5              
 
25-08-1996 vide their O.M No. 14/2/2002-R-2 dated 14-07-2011, a Governm-
ent servant may withdraw his option of voluntary retirement within the period 
of LPR and after retirement, there is no option available to the Government 
servant for re-joining the duty. 
ii) An individual, who goes on 365 days LPR and after availing a part thereof, he 
rejoins his duty. In such cases, the period of leave availed by an individual be 
adjusted in the order of leave on full pay, leave on half pay and extraordinary 
leave (leave without pay). Later on, on attaining the age of superannuation, he 
agains opts for 365 days LPR OR leave encashment of 180 days in lieu of 365 
days LPR. Such option of an individual may be treated as a fresh case and he 
will be allowed LPR or encashment thereof in toto.  
[Authority:- Finance Division‘s O.M. F.1(1)R-4/2007(Vol-II) dated 17-11-2011]. 
3.2 
Further Clarification of Withdrawal of  
Request of LPR/Retirement After  
Sanction/Notification 
Refer 
to 
Finance 
Division‘s 
O.M.No.F.1(1)R-4/2007-(Vol.II) 
dated  
17-11-2011 on the above subject and to state that it has been decided in consultation with 
Establishment Division that a Government Servant can withdraw option of voluntary 
retirement, during the period for which encashment has been applied/granted, subject to 
the following conditions:- 
i. 
He / She may withdraw his/her option of voluntary retirement before 
retirement matures;  
ii. 
It is binding on a government servant to return any amount of leave pay 
received by him/her, in lieu of encashment of LPR for that period; 
iii. 
Later on, on attaining the age of superannuation, if he/she again opts 
for 365 days leave encashment in lieu of 365 days LPR, such option of 
an individual may be treated as a fresh case and he/she will be allowed 
encashment of LPR in toto. 
[Authority:- Finance Division‘s O.M. No.F.1(1)R-4/2007-Vol-II(Pt) dated 06-10-2015]. 
 
3.3 
Option for Encashment of L.P.R. 
 
Reference Finance Division's O.M. No.F.1(19)R-3/83, dated 11-7-1984 (Annex). It 
is stated that in case the leave of any kind including Extra-Ordinary Leave without pay is 
taken during the last 15 or 12 months by a retiring government servant, who opts for 
encashment of L.P.R. except on grounds contained in the above reference, the period of such 
leave will be reduced from 180 days or lesser period for which the encashment is allowed. 
 
[Authority.— Finance Division‘s O.M. No.F.1(73)R-4/84, dated 10-12-1989]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 CHAPTER-5             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 485          
 
 
(ANNEX) 
[Copy of Finance Division O.M. No.F.1(19)R.3/83, dated 11-7-1984]. 
 
Reference para 25, of the Scheme of Basic Pay Scale contained in Finance Division 
O.M. No.1(1)Imp/83, dated 18.8.1983, according to which the encashment of L.P.R., which 
was previously admissible to civil servants only if L.P.R. was refused in public interest, 
would now be admissible to the employees concerned at their own option. In this connection, 
various points have been raised for clarification. It has, therefore, been decided to clarify the 
points of doubt as in the following paragraphs. 
 
2.  
Under the earlier orders, the concession of encashment of L.P.R. on 
retirement on superannuation or on completion of 30 years qualifying service was admissible 
upto the maximum of leave pay for *365 days under rule 17(i) of the Revised Leave Rules, 
1980. The words "leave salary" and *"one year" used in para 25 of the Scheme of Basic Pay 
Scales contained in Finance Division's O.M. No.F.1(1)-Imp/83, dated 18.8.1983, shall, 
therefore, mean "leave pay" and *"three hundred and sixty five days" respectively, as in para 
17 of Revised Leave Rules 1980. 
 
3.  
A civil servant, who wishes to forego his L.P.R. in favour of cash 
compensation, shall exercise his option to this effect in writing 15 months prior to the date of 
retirement, and submit it to the authority competent to sanction for the payment of cash 
compensation. 
 
4.  
After having exercised the option for encashment of L.P.R., the government 
servant shall have to perform duty during the entire period upto the date of retirement and 
cannot, save as stated in para 5 below, avail himself of any kind of leave, during the last 15 
months of his service if the leave, at his credit was 365 days or less, and during the last 12 
months of his service if the leave at his credit was more than 365 days. Provided that in the 
later case, leave can be taken prior to the period of the last 12 months only to the extent that 
the balance leave at credit does not fall below 365 days. 
 
5.  
The competent authority may, where it is satisfied that the leave applied for is 
unavoidable or is fully justified, e.g, in cases of illness, supported by medical certificate, or 
for performance of ‗Hajj‘ etc., grant leave to an employee during the last 15 or 12 months of 
his service, as the case may be, in accordance with para 4 above. In such a case, the amount 
of cash compensation shall be reduced by an amount equal to the leave pay for half of the 
period of leave taken. For example, if an employee, who has opted for encashment of L.P.R., 
has taken 60 days of leave, his cash compensation equal to 30 days leave pay would be 
forfeited. 
 
6.  
It is requested that the cases of encashment of L.P.R. may be regulated 
according to the clarifications contained in this Office Memorandum. 
 
3.4 
Encashment of LPR on Premature Retirement  
 
The matter of allowing of encashment of L.P.R on premature retirement, on 
completion of 31 years qualifying service, has been under consideration of the Finance 
Division. It is clarified that encashment of LPR upto *365 days will also be admissible to 
                         
* Amended vide Finance Division‘s Notification No. S.R.O. 70(KE)/2012, dated 29-8-2012. 

Page - 486             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                     CHAPTER-5              
 
a civil servant who renders 31 years or more qualifying service and who seeks voluntary 
retirement on three months‘ notice in terms of Finance Division‘s O.M No. 591-R.4/83, 
dated 04-09-1983 treating the last year of his service (including the notice period) as duty 
performed during LPR. It is further clarified that such a government servant would also 
be entitled to encash his LPR upto maximum of 365 days subject to the same terms and 
conditions as laid down in rule *18-A of the Revised Leave Rules, 1980‘ as amended 
from time to time read with Finance Division‘s O.M No. F.1 (19) R.3/83, dated 11-07-
1984 and F.1 (73) R.4/84, dated 10-12-1989 respectively. 
[Authority.— Finance Division (Regulations Wing) O.M. No.F.1(8)R-4/90, dated 2-6-1991] 
 
3.5 
Encashment of L.P.R 
 
Reference Finance Division‘s Office Memorandum No. F.1(8)r-4/90, dated 2nd 
June,1991 on the subject. It is to state that the competent authority has been pleased to 
withdraw the O.M referred to above with immediate effect.  
[Authority.— Finance Division (Regulations Wing) O.M. No.F.1(2)R-4/2001, dated 12-03-2002] 
 
3.6 
Encashment of L.P.R (Clarification) 
 
Reference Finance Division‘s Office Memorandum No. F. 1 (2) R-4/2001, dated 
March, 12, 2002 on the subject. Through the aforesaid O.M, this Division‘s earlier O.M No. 
F.1(8)-R.4/90, dated 2nd June, 1991 has been withdrawn being contradictory to rule 18-A (1) 
or Revised Rules, 1980. The cancellation of OM dated 02-06-1991 has created the 
impression as if the facility of encashment of LPR has been discontinued is not correct. The 
OM dated 02-06-1991, stipulates that encashment of LPR is admissible on completion of 31 
years service. On the other hand, under rule 18-A(1), encashment of LPR is admissible on 
superannuation or thirty years qualifying service. Therefore, with the cancellation of this 
Division OM No. F.1(8)-R.4/90, dated 02-06-1991, the cases regarding encashment of LPR 
may be decided under rule 18-A (1) of Revised Leave Rules, 1980. 
[Authority.— Finance Division (Regulations Wing) OM No. F.1(2) R-4/2001, dated 27-03-2002]. 
 
3.7 
Encashment of LPR/Amendment in the  
Revised Leave Rules 1980 in Respect of 
 Leave Encashment/Grant of Encashment  
of LPR for 365 Days Instead of 180 Days  
Sub rule (2A) inserted in Rule 18-A of the Revised Leave Rules, 1980 vide 
Finance Division SRO 70 (KE)/2012 dated 29-08-2012 clearly says that encashment of 
Leave Preparatory to Retirement (LPR) not exceeding three hundred and sixty five days 
shall be effective from the first day of July 2012,and shall, for the entire period of leave 
refused or opted for encashment, be applicable to a Civil servant retired or, as the case 
may be, retiring on or after the first day of July,2012, provided such leave is available at 
his credit subject to a maximum of three hundred and sixty five days. A Civil Servant, 
                         
* Substituted vide Finance Division‘s Notification S.R.No.70(KE)/2012 dated 29-8-2012. 

 CHAPTER-5             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 487          
 
 
whose last working day was 30th June, 2012 and who stood retired w.e.f. 01-07-2012, is 
not entitled to the encashment of Leave Preparatory to Retirement(LPR) @ 365 days in 
lieu of 365 days (LPR).  
[Authority.— Finance Division‘s (Regulation Wing) O.M.No.F.1(7)R-4/2004-Encashment  
dated 28-01-2013]. 
4.1 
Permission to Seek Private Employment by Civil Servants 
During LPR Within Two Years of Retirement  
A proforma is required to be filled in by Civil Servants who may be desirous or 
seeking private employment during LPR or within two years of the date of the retirement, 
in accordance with Section 14 of the Civil Servants Act, 1973. 
[Authority:- Establishment Division‘s O.M. No.8/1/81-D.4/D.3, dated 17-07-2002]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page - 488             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                     CHAPTER-5              
 
      Annexure  
Revised Proforma 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
      (See. Sl. No. 4.1) 
 
APPLICATION FORM FOR SEEKING PRIVATE 
EMPLOYMENT DURING LPR/WITHIN TWO YEARS OF RETIREMENT 
 
1. 
Name: ………………………….. 
2. 
Appointments held during last 5 years of service: 
 
Post(s) held 
with BPS 
Department(s)/Organization(s) 
Total Period of Stay 
From 
To 
 
 
 
 
 
3. 
Nature of Retirement (): ........................................................... 
4. 
Date of Proceeding on LPR: ...................................................... 
5. 
Date of Retirement: .................................................................... 
6. 
Particulars of Private Employee: ................................................ 
(i) 
Name of organization: ...................................................... 
(ii) 
Law under which registered: ............................................ 
(iii) Composition of the Board of Directors: ........................... 
(iv) Nature of business etc: .....................................................  
(v) 
Location of Head Office: .................................................. 
 
7. 
Designation of the Post and Pay Offered: .................................. 
8. 
Nature of duties: ......................................................................... 
9. 
Whether the firm had official dealings with any of the department in which the 
officer served during the last five years. If so please give details: 
10. 
Any other information 
 
Signature 
with Designation/Grade 
of last post held and Organization 
 
(i) 
On attaining the age of superannuation. 
(ii) 
Voluntary retirement on completion of 25 years service. 
(iii) Premature retirement, under Section 13(1)(i) of Civil Servants Act, 1973. 
(iv) Compulsory retirement on account of disciplinary action. 
(v) 
Retirement on medical grounds. 
(Additional sheet(s) may be added where necessary) 
                         
 Pl. indicate one of the following: 
(a) 
Voluntary retirement on completion of 25 years service. 
(b) Retirement on attaining the age of superannuation (60 Years). 
 Now BPS. 

 CHAPTER-5             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 489          
 
 
4.2 
Arrangements for Providing Substitutes  
for Officers Proceeding on L.P.R 
 
The maximum period upto which a civil servant may be granted LPR shall be 
365 days. 
 
2. 
To make suitable arrangement for the replacement of retired personnel, a 
list should in the beginning of a calendar year be prepared of such officers and other 
employees who may be due to retire during that calendar year and early next year.  Those 
officers/employees should accordingly be asked in writing whether or not they intend to 
proceed on LPR and if so by which date.  Thereafter, action for providing suitable 
substitute should be initiated.  On this principle, action may be taken much in advance 
during the year preceding the year during which officers are due to retire. 
 
3. 
Establishment Division is to be contacted as early as possible by (or 
through) the Ministry/Division concerned for providing a substitute if he belongs to an 
administrative group/service which is controlled by the Establishment Division. 
[Authority:- Establishment Division‘s O.M. No.8/53/78-F.1, dated 31-10-1978]. 
 
5.1 
Special Instructions Relevant to Leave of  
Civil Servants: Absence from Headquarters 
Absence from headquarters during leave, holidays or casual leave without 
obtaining permission from the competent authority is irregular. It is necessary for the 
government servant concerned to take permission of the authority which sanctioned the 
leave before leaving his headquarters station and keep his controlling officer advised of 
the change of address. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 23(49)-RI(2)/54, dated 29-12-1954]. 
 
5.2 
Leaving Headquarters During  
Holidays or Casual Leave  
 
The orders contained in the Ministry of Finance Office Memorandum No.46-F. 23 
(49)-RI (2)/54, dated the 29th December, 1954 are also applicable to the cases of Government 
Servants who leave their headquarters during holidays or while they are on casual leave. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 7/6/55-SE-II, dated 13-6-1955]. 
5.3 
Bar Against Leaving Place of Duty Without  
Waiting for Sanction of Leave 
The civil servants applying for grant of leave are not to leave their offices/places 
of duty without waiting for actual sanction of the leave applied for.  Attention is invited 
to F. R. 67 wherein it is clearly stated that leave cannot be claimed as of right.  Thus an 
application for leave should not be anticipated as grant of leave.  It should therefore, be 
brought home to the civil servants serving under the control of Ministries/Divisions that 
if they apply for grant of leave, they must wait for sanction of leave and should not leave 
the place of their duty before the leave applied for is actually granted by the competent 
authority. Non-compliance of these instructions might warrant action on account of 
misconduct under the relevant rule. 
[Authority:- Establishment Division‘s O.M. No.10/22/83-R.2, dated 12-08-1985] 

Page - 490             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                     CHAPTER-5              
 
5.4 
Procedure for Grant of Leave to High Officials and to the Officers 
Belonging to Groups/Services/Cadres Controlled by Establishment 
Division 
Under rule 38 of the Revised Leave Rules, 1980, leave is to be sanctioned by the 
head of the Ministry, Division, Department, Office or any other officer authorized by him 
to do so and in the case of the head of office by the next above administrative authority. 
While the officers belonging to Group/ Service/Cadre controlled by the Establishment 
Division shall apply and be granted leave as provided for in rule 38, copies of 
notifications granting leave to such officers shall invariably be endorsed to Establishment 
Division. Where a Ministry/Division required a substitute in place of the officer 
belonging to the Groups/Services/Cadres controlled by the Establishment Division who is 
desirous of proceeding on leave of duration of 90 days or more, leave may be granted 
after consulting the Establishment Division. 
 
2. 
In the case of grant of leave to a Secretary General, Secretary or Acting 
Secretary to the Federal Government, or to Additional Secretary/Joint Secretary Incharge 
of a Ministry/ Division or Heads of department in BPS-22 and civil servants of equivalent 
status serving as heads of the autonomous and semi-autonomous bodies/corporations 
under the administrative control of the Federal Government, the following procedure will 
be followed:– 
(i) 
The application for leave on full pay upto a period of 30 days will be 
submitted through the Minister to the Prime Minister for orders and a copy 
of the notification granting leave shall be endorsed to the Secretary, 
Establishment Division. 
(ii) 
The application for leave on full pay for a period of more than 30 days 
would be submitted through the Secretary, Establishment Division by the 
Minister to Prime Minister for obtaining the Prime Minister‘s orders. 
 
3. 
The Provincial Governments will continue to exercise the powers to grant 
leave, including leave ex-Pakistan, upto 120 days to the officers of *All Pakistan Unified 
Grades/Services/Cadres working under them. Applications for leave in excess of 120 
days shall be referred to the Establishment Division. 
 
4. 
The Establishment Division shall be consulted prior to the grant of leave 
to officers of the *APUG and OMG for a period exceeding four months. 
 
5. 
When an officer is transferred from one department to another, no leave 
should be sanctioned to him by the department from which he is transferred. In such 
cases, leave can be allowed only by the authority under whose control the transferred 
officer has to go. 
 
6. 
Ministries/Divisions are to ensure compliance of the above instructions 
also by the Attached Departments, Subordinate Offices, Autonomous/ Semi-autonomous 
Bodies/Corporations under their administrative control.  
[Reviewed by Establishment Division‘s O.M. No.10/22/83-R.2, dated 18-11-1985  
vide Establishment Division‘s O.M. No.10/13/2001-R.2, dated 01-03-2001] 
                         
*All Pakistan Services (Change in Nomenclature) Rules, 1973, notified vide SRO 1307(I)/73 dated 14-09-1973, 
have been repealed vide SRO 89(I)/2014 dated 14-02-2014, whereby all notifications and instructions issued on 
the subject from time to time were mutatis mutandis amended.   

 CHAPTER-5             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 491          
 
 
Sl.No. 6 
Grant of Leave to Government Servants for the Period Spent in Giving Evidence 
Otherwise than on Behalf of the State in a Criminal/Civil Case not Connected with 
their Official Duties  
 
A question has arisen as to whether a government servant who is summoned by a 
court of law to give evidence otherwise than on behalf of the State is to be treated on duty or 
on leave. It has been decided in consultation with the Ministry of Finance that in such cases 
the Government Servant concerned should be granted leave. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 846/59-E, XII, dated 17-11-1959]. 
 
7.1 
Grant of Leave to Officers Transferred to Other Posts  
 
It has been decided that, in future, an officer transferred to another post, either in 
the Federal Secretariat, its Attached or Subordinate Offices, or to a post under a Provincial 
Government on reversion from the *Centre, should not be allowed leave for any period, 
except by the authority to whose control he is transferred. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M .No.6 (21)/60-E.IX, dated 8-10-1960]. 
 
7.2 
Sanction and Notification of Leave of  
Officers Transferred to Other Posts 
 
Doubts have arisen as to who should sanction and notify the leave in the case of 
officers referred to in Establishment Division Office Memorandum No.6(21)/60-E.IX, dated 
the 8th October, 1960. The intention is that after the date of issue of transfer orders, leave 
should be allowed and notified only by the authority under whose control the officer 
transferred has to go. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 8/20/60-F.I, dated 30-11-1961]. 
 
 
8.1 
Grant of Extraordinary Leave (Leave Without Pay)  
under Rule 9 of the Revised Leave Rules, 1980 
 
It is clarified after consultation with Law and Justice Division, Establishment 
Division and Auditor General of Pakistan that EOL of five years is admissible to a 
government servant for each ‘spell of' ten years of continuous service. If, however, a civil 
servant has not completed ten years of continuous service on each occasion/time, EOL 
without pay for a maximum period of two years may be granted at the discretion of the head 
of his Ministry/Division/ Department. 
 
2. 
The maximum leave availed during one continuous period should also not 
exceed 5 years. 
 
3.  
The cases already decided by the Ministries/Divisions need not be  
re-opened. 
[Authority:- Finance Division‘s Notification No.F.1(68)/R.4/84, dated 02-07-1991] 
 
                         
*Federal Government. 

Page - 492             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                     CHAPTER-5              
 
8.2 
Grant of (EOL) Without Pay and Conversion  
of EOL into Another Kind of Leave  
The following special features of the EOL need to be kept in view while dealing 
with such cases:- 
(i) 
The pay and allowances are inadmissible during the EOL. Annual 
increments also are inadmissible under FR-26. 
(ii) 
The period of the EOL is not counted towards pension under CSR 361. 
(iii) The EOL can cover a period of unauthorized absence; either under an 
administrative order vide rule 9(3) of Revised Leave Rules 1980 or on a 
court‘s directions. 
(iv) The period of EOL is not considered as period spent on duty under FR-9 
(6). 
 
2. 
Due to the special characteristics of EOL stated above, no rule has been 
framed for its conversion into another kind of leave retrospectively because it not only 
involves payment of salary for the previous EOL period but would also involve change in 
the directions/orders of the authority. Moreover, a Government Servant under rule 24 of 
Revised Leave Rules 1980, has been given the option to apply for any kind of leave. The 
leave sanctioning authority has no power to change the nature of leave. This option, once 
exercised by the government servant, is considered final. Sometimes, cases for 
retrospective conversion of EOL into another kind of leave are moved on the basis of 
CSR 232 (3) despite the fact that this rule does not specifically deal with EOL. Similarly, 
Government decision (3) under FR-87 cannot be used for conversion of EOL into another 
kind of leave because the said rule governs the leave salary. In the light of foregoing, it 
has been decided that EOL cannot be converted into any other kind of leave, 
retrospectively. 
[Authority:- Finance Division (Regulation Wing)‘s O.M. No.F.1(12) R.4/97,dated 7-1-2002] 
 
8.3 
Employment of Government Servants with  
International Organizations, Foreign  
Governments on the Basis of Leave DUE/EOL 
Ministries/ Divisions/Provincial Governments have to obtain, through Establish-
ment Division, approval of the competent authority in case of employment of 
Government Servants with International Organizations/UN Specialized Agencies/Foreign 
Governments on the basis of leave due/EOL. Ministries/Divisions/Provincial Governm-
ents must ensure compliance with the existing requirement to obtain clearance of all such 
cases of employment of Government Servants (BPS-17 and above/equivalent) with 
International Organizations/UN Specialized Agencies/Foreign Governments from the 
SSB* and approval for BPS-20 and above officers from the Prime Minister. 
 
2. 
The cases of officers in BPS-16 and below/equivalent may be approved by 
the administrative Secretary of the Ministry/Division.   
[Authority:- Establishment Division‘s O.M. No.1/65/90-T.IV, dated 11-07-2000] 
                         
* Special Selection Board. 

 CHAPTER-5             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 493          
 
 
Sl.No.9 
Grant of Special Leave to Khuddam-ul-Hajjaj 
‗Khuddam-ul-Hajjaj‘, (servants of the pilgrims) who remain away from their 
respective duties to work as khuddam, (servants) may be granted special leave on full pay 
for that period outside their leave account. 
[Authority:- Finance Division‘s O.M. No.F.1(15) R.4/82, dated 11-08-1982] 
 
10.1 
Leave Reserve under the Section Officers'  
 
Scheme and its Proper Utilization 
 
The posts of Section Officers, Assistants, Stenotypists, Upper Division Clerks 
and Lower Division Clerks created under the Section Officers' Scheme include posts in the 
leave reserve which is equal to ten percent of the sanctioned strength in those grades. The 
position in regard to the utilization of the leave reserve and of filling up of the leave vacancies 
in the *grades in which leave reserve has been provided, is as follows:- 
(i) 
No leave vacancy in the *grades in which leave reserve has been provided, 
should normally be filled. 
(ii) 
In case there is a deficiency in the *grades in which leave reserve has been 
provided, or where the number of persons on leave is in excess of the 
number of persons actually available in the leave reserve and it is difficult for 
the Ministry concerned to discharge its responsibilities efficiently without 
additional staff, officiating arrangements may be made as a special case, after 
consulting the Financial Adviser in the case of non-gazetted staff and the 
Ministry of Finance in the case of Gazetted officers. 
(iii) All officers and staff employed in the *grades in which leave reserve has 
been provided should be asked, towards the end of each calendar year to 
indicate the approximate date on which and the period for which they wish 
to proceed on leave during the next year.  On the basis of the information 
so collected, a leave programme for the year should be prepared in such a 
way that, at any given time, the number of persons on leave does not, as far 
as possible, exceed the leave reserve in the *grade concerned. The officer 
and staff available against the leave reserve would thus be available to 
attend to the work of those granted leave. If there are occasional gaps when 
the number of officers/staff wishing to proceed on leave is less than the 
leave reserve, the services of the officers/staff available as leave reserve may 
be utilized for special items of work which the Ministry may be called upon 
to undertake, the clearance of arrears in overworked Sections or re-arranging 
and weeding the records of the Ministry. 
                         
 BPS/Post(s). 

Page - 494             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                     CHAPTER-5              
 
(iv) Leave reserve should be treated as an integral part of the *grades 
concerned and the persons who are appointed against that reserve should 
not be labelled as such. The work in a Ministry or Division should, 
however, be divided in such a way as to facilitate the proper utilization of 
leave reserve on the lines suggested above. 
 
(2)  This issues with the concurrence of the Ministry of Finance. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No.3/1/60-SR, dated 1-2-1961]. 
 
10.2 
Leave Reserve Section 
 
The review of the staff position carried out by the Management Services Wing has 
revealed that practically all Ministries/Divisions have converted Leave Reserve Section 
Officers into regular Sections by assigning to them specific items of work which are of 
regular nature. It defeats the very objective for which Leave Reserve has been created. 
 
2. 
 In order to ensure the proper utilization of the Section Officers and their 
ancillary staff in the Leave Reserve, it has been decided  that  following  arrangements  
should  be made in various Ministries/Divisions:- 
 
(i) 
Experienced Section Officers along with their ancillary staff who could 
dispose of all types of cases, should be selected to work as Leave Reserve 
Officers, and no regular work should be assigned to them ; 
 
(ii) 
The Leave Reserve Section Officer(s) at Rawalpindi /Islamabad or Karachi 
should be attached directly with the Secretary or other senior officer(s) at the 
station; and 
 
(iii) When not employed in leave vacancies, the Section Officers should, along 
with their ancillary staff, attend to the difficult cases of other Sections which 
may be assigned to them by the Secretary or the senior officer(s) with whom 
they have been attached. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No.3/1/60-C-III, dated 4-10-1961]. 
 
10.3 
Utilization of Leave Reserve Section 
 
It is obligatory on the Ministries/Divisions to observe the instructions contained in 
the Establishment Division Office Memoranda No. 3/1/60-SR, dated the 1st February, 1961, 
and No. 3/1/60-C.II, dated the 4th Oct., 1961 regarding the utilization of Leave Reserve 
Section Officers. In this connection, it may be mentioned that in their meeting held on the 
14th November, 1961, the ‗Standing Committee for Consideration of Ideas for Improvement 
in Administration‘ observed that the Leave Reserve Officers were primarily to be used for 
the purpose for which they were meant and should not be absorbed in the normal 
organisation of the Ministries and that when not employed against leave vacancies they 
should be used as a striking force to deal with arrears in any section or sudden pressure of 
work. In view of this, the Ministry of Commerce, etc. are requested to re-organize their 
Sections in such a way as not to entrust the Leave Reserve Section Officers with regular 
Sections.  However, if they require any additional post of Section Officer they should take up 
the matter in the normal way. Attention in this connection is also invited to the Establishment 
Division's Office Memorandum No. 5/34/59-SR, dated the 13th February, 1961 (Annex) 

 CHAPTER-5             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 495          
 
 
regarding procedure for creation/abolition of posts of Section Officers. 
[Authority.— Estt. Division‘s O.M. No.3/1/60-C-III, dated 5-2-1962]. 
(ANNEX) 
[Copy of Establishment Division O.M No. 5/34/59-SR dated 13th February, 1961]. 
 
Procedure for creation/abolition of posts of Section Officers: For some time past, 
the Establishment Division have been considering the question of issuing sanction letters 
regarding the creation of posts of Section Officers. It has now been decided in consultation 
with the Ministry of Finance that such sanction letters should be issued by the administrative 
Ministries concerned in the usual manner. 
 
2. 
It has further been decided that prior concurrence of the Establishment 
Division should invariably be obtained before any additional post is created or any existing 
post is abolished in the cadre of the Section Officer. 
10.4 
Filling-up of Vacancies on Proceeding  
of Section Officers on LPR  
 
It has since been decided in consultation with the Ministry of Finance that leave 
vacancies caused due to Section Officers proceeding on leave preparatory to retirement, may 
be filled in accordance with the rules. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 3/1/60-C.III, dated 6-4-1962]. 
 
10.5 
Leave and Training Reserve 
 
A Leave Reserve equal to ten percent of the duty posts in the Section Officers 
Grade has been provided to each Ministry/ Division. Instructions regarding the utilization of 
the services of Section Officers in this Reserve are contained in the Establishment Division 
Office Memoranda No. 3/1/60-SR, dated  the 1st February, 1961 and  No. 3/1/60-C.III, dated 
the 4th, October 1961 and 5th February, 1962.  These instructions, inter alia, provide that 
Leave Reserve Section Officers should not be absorbed in the regular sections of the 
Ministries.  However, it has been observed that with the passage of time these instructions 
have been lost sight of by almost all the Divisions who have converted the Leave Reserve 
into regular Sections. The result is that when any Section Officer proceeds on leave, no 
Leave Reserve Section Officer becomes available to attend to his work. This has defeated the 
very purpose for which the Leave Reserve was created, i.e., to have a pool of Officers whose 
services could immediately become available without any dislocation when any Section 
Officer proceeded on leave. 
 
2.  
In addition to the Leave Reserve, each Division has been provided with a 
Training Reserve, equal to ten percent of the duty posts in the Section Officers‘ Grade. This 
reserve is mainly intended to accommodate the Section Officers (Probationers) after the 
completion of their training at the Secretariat Training Institute and till their absorption 
against regular vacancies on the successful completion of their probationary period. The 
officers in this Reserve are also required to attend to the work of those Section Officers who 
proceed on training (e.g. to the S.T.I., the NIM and training courses abroad etc.). 

Page - 496             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                     CHAPTER-5              
 
Establishment Division's Office Memorandum No. 2/2/62-CIII, dated the 30th November, 
1962 refers in this connection. It is observed that like the Leave Reserve, the Training 
Reserve has also been absorbed in the regular set-up of the Divisions. Therefore, this also has 
militated against the very concept of having a Training Reserve with the result that 
Ministries/Divisions are usually unable to make available their officers for training when 
required to do so on the plea that arrangements against the resultant vacancies cannot be 
made. This obviously retards the process of training of Section Officers which is so 
necessary for improving efficiency in the Secretariat. 
 
3.  
In order to ensure proper utilization of the Leave and Training Reserves, all 
the Ministries are requested to review the position and limit the number of their regular 
Sections to the number of duty posts in the Section Officers Grade sanctioned for them. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No.3/1/60-C-III, dated 17-6-1967]. 
 
11.1 Grant of Study Leave Outside Pakistan 
 
The grant of study leave outside Pakistan admissible under F.R. 84 read with 
Appendix No. 9 of F.R. & S.R. Volume II was held in abeyance. Subject to the conditi-
ons laid down in the succeeding paragraphs the ban imposed on the grant of study leave 
is lifted. 
  
2. 
In the case of professors, teachers and professional experts like engineers 
and doctors, study leave may be granted subject to the usual conditions provided 
necessary facilities in the particular field of study are not available in Pakistan. 
 
3. 
In the case of other Government Servants, study leave should be granted, 
in consultation with the Financial Adviser concerned, in exceptional cases, after it has 
been established that the proposed course of study shall be beneficial in relation to the 
functions of the Ministry/Division etc. and that suitable and/or equivalent facilities for 
such a study are not available within the country. 
[Authority:- Finance Division‘s O.M No.F.10(3)-R-I/65, dated 20-09-1966]. 
 
11.2 
Study Leave for L.L.M. (Shariah and Law)  
Courses of Islamic University Islamabad  
Under F.R. 84 read with Appendix 9 of F.Rs. & S.Rs Vol.II that study leave is 
admissible to permanent officers in BPS 16 and above for the study of scientific, 
technical or similar problems, or to undertake special courses of instruction.  The study 
leave may be granted to permanent officers of  BPS 16 and above to study the course of 
L.L.M. (Shariah & Law) introduced by the Islamic University, Islamabad, subject to the 
limit and other conditions as laid down in Appendix 9 of F. Rs & S. Rs Vol. II and orders 
issued thereunder. 
[Authority:-Finance Division‘s O.M. No. F.1(39)R-4/81-801, dated 17-12-1981]. 
 
 
 

 CHAPTER-5             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 497          
 
 
 
11.3 
Study Leave Rules Prescribed 
by the President (F.R. 84)*  
 
Study leave may be granted as additional leave to Government servants for the 
study of scientific, technical or similar problems, or in order to undertake special courses of 
instruction. 
 
2.  
These rules are not intended to meet the case of Government Servants 
deputed to other countries at the instance of Government, either for the performance of 
special duties imposed on them or for the investigation of specific problems connected with 
their technical duties.  Such cases will continue to be dealt with on their merits under the 
provisions of Rules 50 and 51 of the Fundamental Rules. 
 
3.  
The rules shall apply to the Department of Archaeology, Public Health and 
Medical Department, Botanical Survey, Civil Veterinary Department, Factory Departments, 
Geological Survey of Pakistan, Agricultural Department, Meteorological Department, 
Railways Division (Traffic, Locomotive & Engineering Branches), Education Department, 
Pakistan Public Works Department, Pakistan Forest Institute and National Council for 
Conservation of Wild Life (except in respect of continental tours, to which special rules apply). 
 
4.  
The rules may be extended by the authorities empowered to sanction study 
leave to any Government Servant, including a Government Servant of a Provincial Service, 
not belonging to any of the departments mentioned above, in whose case if the sanctioning 
authority is of the opinion that leave should be granted in the public interest to pursue a 
special course of study or investigation of a scientific or technical nature. 
 
5.  
The powers granted by these Rules to the Government of Pakistan or to local 
Governments may be delegated by them to the Ambassador for Pakistan subject to any 
condition they may think fit to impose. 
 
6.  
Extra leave on half pay for the purpose of study leave may be taken either in 
or outside Pakistan.  It may be granted to a Government servant of any of the Departments 
named above by the Local Government under whom he is serving provided that when a 
Government Servant borne permanently on the cadre of one Province or department is 
serving temporarily in another Province or department the grant of leave is subject to the 
conditions:— 
 
(a) 
that the sanctioning authority can take local arrangements to carry on his 
work in his absence; and 
 
(b) 
that the sanction of the Province or department to which he is permanently 
attached is obtained before leave is given. 
 
7.  
Study leave should not ordinarily be granted to Government servants of less 
than five years' service or to Government servants within three years of the date at which 
                         
* See FR 84 at pages 127-128, Compilation of FRs and SRs Vol. I, First Edition (Second Reprint), 1978. SR 22 
above is at Appendix 9 (FR 84), Vol. II, pages 65-68, Appendices & Forms, Second Edition Revised (corrected 
upto September, 1985 of the book ibid). 

Page - 498             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                     CHAPTER-5              
 
they have the option of retiring, or, if they have the option of retiring after 25 years' service, 
within three years of the date at which they will complete 25 years' service.  Nor should it be 
granted to Government Servants who are about to retire on proportionate pension. 
 
8.  
Ministries and Divisions of the Government of Pakistan may grant study 
leave to Government Servants under their administrative control, subject to the restrictions 
which apply to the powers of a Local Government. 
 
9.  
The study leave should be granted with due regard to the exigencies of the 
public service. In no case should the grant of this leave, in combination with leave other than 
extraordinary leave or leave on medical certificate, involve absence of a Government servant 
for more than forty-eight months from regular duties nor should it be granted with such 
frequency as to remove him from contact with his regular work or to cause cadre difficulties 
owing to his absence on leave. The study leave if taken on different occasions, shall not 
exceed forty-eight months in entire service of a Government servant. 
 
10.  A Government servant whose study leave in combined with any other kind of 
leave should be required to take his period of study leave at such a time as to retain, at its 
conclusion, a balance of other previously sanctioned leave sufficient to cover the period 
spent in returning to duty. 
 
11.  When a Government servant has been granted a definite period of study leave 
and finds subsequently that his course of study will fall short of the sanctioned period to any 
considerable extent, his absence from duty should be reduced by the excess period of study 
leave unless he produces the assent of the sanctioning authority in Pakistan to his taking it as 
ordinary leave. 
 
12.  Except as provided in Rule 13, all applications for study leave should be 
submitted with the Audit Officer's certificate to the Head of the Department through the 
prescribed channel and the course or courses of study contemplated and any examination which 
the candidate proposes to undergo should be clearly specified therein. If the course of study is 
abroad the Head of the Department should also forward to the Ambassador for Pakistan a copy 
of the approved programme of study. If it is not possible for the Government servant to give 
full details, as above, in his original application, or if, at leaving Pakistan he wishes to make any 
changes in the programme which has been approved in Pakistan, he should submit particulars 
as soon as possible to the Ambassador for Pakistan. In such cases he should not unless prepared 
to do so at his own risk, commence the course of study, nor incur any expenses in connection 
therewith, until he receives approval to the course through the Ambassador. 
 
13.  (1) Government servants on leave ex-Pakistan who wish to convert part of 
the leave into study leave or to undertake a course of study during leave, should before 
commencing study and before incurring any expenses in connection therewith, submit a 
programme of their proposed course of study to the Ambassador for Pakistan.  The 
programme should be accompanied by an official syllabus of the course, if one is available, 
and by any documentary evidence that the particular course, or examination, has the 
approval of the authorities in Pakistan. In the absence of such evidence the programme may, 
if approved by the Ambassador, be proceeded with, but no study leave allowance will be 
admissible until the concurrence of the authority concerned in Pakistan is received. 
                         
 Amended vide Finance Division (Regulation Wing) Notification No. F.1(2)R.4/2003 dated 5-6-2004. 

 CHAPTER-5             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 499          
 
 
 
(2)  Government servants on leave ex-Pakistan who desire to have it extended for 
purposes of study under these Rules, should address the Ambassador for Pakistan but in 
addition to furnishing a statement of proposed study they must support their application with 
documentary evidence of their having obtained the approval of the authorities concerned in 
Pakistan to their applying for an extension of leave. They must also produce documentary 
evidence of the concurrence of the authority concerned in Pakistan to the grant of study leave 
or study allowance or both. 
 
14.  No course of study will be recognized as qualifying for the grant of study 
allowance, or for study leave for any other purpose, unless it has been approved in at least 
broad outline by the sanctioning authority in Pakistan in accordance with Rules 12 and 13 
above, and unless, in cases where it has not been found possible to submit full particulars to 
the authorities in Pakistan, it has been approved in detail by the Ambassador before it is begun. 
 
15.  A study allowance will be granted for the period spent in prosecuting a 
definite course of study at a recognized Institution or in any definite tour of inspection of any 
special class of work, as well as for the period covered by any examination at the end of the 
course of study. In no case will subsistence allowance be granted in addition to study 
allowance and ordinarily travelling expenses will not be paid, but in exceptional cases claims 
will be considered on their merits by the Government of Pakistan or the Local Government. 
 
16.  Study allowance will be admissible up to 14 days for any period of vacation.  
A period, during which a Government servant interrupts his course for his own convenience, 
cannot be considered as vacation.  Study allowance may be given at the discretion of the 
Government of Pakistan or a local Government for any period up to fourteen days at one 
time during which the officer is prevented by sickness duly certified by a medical 
practitioner from pursuing the sanctioned course of study.  In the case of a Government 
servant retiring from the service without returning to duty after a period of study leave, the 
study allowance will be forfeited. If the Government servant is under civil leave rules the 
study leave will be converted into ordinary leave to the extent of the ordinary leave standing 
to his credit at the date of retirement. Any balance of the period of study leave mentioned 
above which cannot be so converted will be excluded in reckoning service for pension. 
 
17.  Government servants granted study leave are ordinarily required to meet the 
cost of fees paid for courses of study. In exceptional cases, the Government of Pakistan or 
the Local Government will be prepared to consider proposals that such fees should be paid 
by Government. 
 
18.  On completion of a course of study a certificate on the proper form (which 
may be obtained from the Ambassador), together with certificates of examinations passed or 
of special study shall be forwarded to the authority which sanctioned the leave.  In the case 
of a definite course of study at a recognized Institution, the study allowance will be payable 
by the Ambassador or in Pakistan, as the case may be, on claims submitted by the 
Government servant from time to time, supported by proper certificates of attendance. When 
the programme of study approved under Rule 12 does not include or does not consist entirely 
of such a course of study, the Government servant shall submit to the Ambassador or to the 

Page - 500             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                     CHAPTER-5              
 
authority in Pakistan which sanctioned his leave, as the case may be, a diary showing how 
his time has been spent, and a report indicating fully the nature of the methods and 
operations which have been studied, and including suggestion as to the possibility of 
applying such methods or operations to Pakistan. The sanctioning authority in Pakistan will 
decide whether the diary and report show that the time of the Government servant has been 
properly employed, and will determine accordingly for what period the study allowance 
referred to in Rule 15 may be granted. 
 
19.  Study leave will count as service for promotion and pension, but not for 
leave. It will not affect any leave which may already be due to a Government servant; it will 
count as extra leave on half average pay and will be taken into account in reckoning the 
aggregate amount of leave on half average pay taken by the Government servant towards the 
maximum period admissible under the Fundamental Rules. 
 
20.  During study leave a Government servant will draw half pay. A Government 
servant may, subject to the approval of the proper authorities being obtained as required by 
Rule 12 or 13, undertake or commence a course of study during leave on average pay, and, 
subject to Rules 15 and 16, draw study allowance in respect thereof, provided that study 
allowance is not drawn for an aggregate period exceeding two years during the entire service 
of a Government servant.  This rule applies to military officers in civil employment taking 
leave under the Fundamental Rules. 
 
21.  On an application for study leave abroad being sanctioned by a Local 
Government, it should inform the Ambassador of the particulars of the case. It will be 
necessary for the Government servant concerned to place himself in communication with the 
Ambassador, who will arrange any details and issue any letters of introduction that may be 
required. 
[Authority.- Finance Division‘s Notification No. S.R.O. 923(I)/85, dated 8-9-1985  
published in gazette of Pakistan, Extraordinary dated 1-10-1985]. 
 
12.1 
Casual Leave – Grant of Maximum Leave at a Time  
 
Amount of Casual Leave admissible during a calendar year and the maximum at a 
time. It has been decided that Casual Leave upto a maximum of 20 days in a calendar year 
may be granted to the staff employed in the offices of the Federal Government. 
[Authority.- Home Affairs Division‘s O.M. No.34/27/48-Public, dated 13-3-1948]. 
 
 
12.2 
Grant of Casual Leave at a Time 
 
 Under the existing orders, 20 days' Casual Leave is admissible during a calendar 
year, and the maximum amount that can be allowed at a time is 10 days in the case of 
members of staff and 15 days in the case of officers.  It has now been decided that 15 days' 
casual leave at a time may be granted to the members of staff also. This rule may be relaxed 
at the discretion of the Head of Department in special circumstances in the case of officers as 
well as members of staff. 
 
2.  
It has also been decided that Ministries, Departments, etc., should be more 
liberal in the grant of casual leave.  Although casual leave cannot be claimed as a matter of 
                         
 Compilation of FR&SR, Vol I, Part IV, Chapter 10. FR 84 read with Appendix 9. 

 CHAPTER-5             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 501          
 
 
right, it should be granted invariably unless the presence of an officer is absolutely necessary 
e.g. in an emergency or in very extraordinary circumstances. 
[Authority.- Home Affairs Division‘s O.M. No.9/2/53-Public, dated 12-8-1953]. 
 
12.3 
Spreading of Casual Leave 
Over Two Years  
 
A question has been raised whether casual leave can be granted within the 
prescribed limit at one time in such a manner as to spread it over 2 years, i.e. some portion of 
it in one calendar year and the rest in the following year in one stretch.  It has been decided 
that a Head of Department may grant casual leave in one spell within the prescribed limit so 
as to debit a part of it against the account of one calendar year and part of it against the 
account of the following calendar year, provided leave is due.  For instance, if a person take 
15 days casual leave on the 22nd December and has to his credit 10 days casual leave in that 
year, there will be no objection if 10 days leave is debited against that credit and the 
remaining 5 days are debited to the account of the following year.  In other words, he would 
be deemed to have taken 10 days casual leave at the end of that year and 5 days leave in the 
beginning of the next year. 
[Authority.- Home Affairs Division‘s O.M. No.9/1/56-Public, dated 9-8-1956]. 
 
12.4 
Combination of Casual Leave with Holidays  
 
Some doubts have been raised regarding the combination of casual leave with 
holidays.  After careful consideration of the matter it has been decided that: 
 
(a) 
casual leave may be prefixed or suffixed to a closed or optional holiday, 
 
(b) 
casual leave may be sandwitched in between two closed or optional 
holidays. 
 
2.  
However, if a closed or an optional holiday falls between two days of casual 
leave it should also be counted as a casual leave. 
[Authority.- Home Affairs Division‘s O.M. No.9/1/53-Public, dated 24-4-1953]. 
12.5 
Procedure for Grant of Casual Leave  
to the Secretaries to the Government  
and Heads of Departments  
 
A question has been raised as to who should grant leave to Secretaries to the 
Government of Pakistan. 
 
2.  
According to item 48 in Appendix 13 of the Fundamental and Supplementary 
Rules-Volume II, the Ministries have been delegated full powers to grant leave to a gazetted 
Government Servant not in foreign service. 
 
3. 
 In accordance with the above rule, the Secretary as the official head of the 
Division is empowered to grant leave to his subordinates. It is not, however, clear as to who 
is the appropriate authority for grant of leave to the Secretaries. Under the Rules of Business, 
1973, the Minister, who is the next higher authority, is mainly concerned with policy matters 
and does not ordinarily pass executive orders himself.  Normally, such cases have to be 

Page - 502             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                     CHAPTER-5              
 
submitted for the President's orders.  In order to avoid frequent references to the President, 
the following procedure has been laid down:- 
 
 (i) 
The Minister-in-Charge may grant casual leave upto 10 days to a Secretary to 
the Government of Pakistan on behalf of the President and the Establishment 
Division should be informed in such cases. 
 
(ii) 
All cases of casual leave beyond 10 days and cases of earned leave upto a 
period of 1 month will be submitted through the Minister to the President for 
orders under intimation to the Establishment Division. 
  
(iii) Leave applications of Secretaries for a period of more than 1 month would be 
endorsed by the Minister to the Establishment Division for obtaining the 
President's orders. 
 
4. 
The above instructions may please be brought to the notice of all concerned 
for strict compliance. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M.‘s No. 23 (I)/69-AI, dated 18-3-1969]. 
 
12.6 
Procedure for Grant of Casual  
Leave to Secretaries 
 
Reference Establishment Division's O.M. No. 23(1)/ 69-A.I. dated 18-3-1969.  
With immediate effect, the following procedure shall be observed for grant of casual 
leave to a Secretary General, Secretary or Acting Secretary to the Federal Government or 
to Additional Secretary/Joint Secretary Incharge of a Ministry/Division:— 
(i) 
In cases of leave upto ten days, the Minister-in-Charge may sanction the 
leave and intimation to that effect given to the Secretary, Establishment 
Division by the Ministry/Division concerned. 
(ii) 
In cases of leave beyond ten days, the leave application shall be submitted by 
the Minister-in-Charge to the Prime Minister for orders and if the leave is 
sanctioned, an intimation to that effect shall be given to the Secretary, 
Establishment Division by the concerned Ministry/Division. 
 
2. 
The above instructions may be brought to the notice of all concerned for 
compliance. 
[Authority.— Estt. Division‘s O.M. No.10/22/83-R. 2, dated 18-11-1985]. 
12.7 
Grant of Casual Leave to Heads  
of Departments and Subordinate 
Offices 
 
A reference is invited to the Establishment Division letter No. D-671/ 71-F.I, dated 
the 13th July, 1971, in which Ministries/ Divisions were requested to inform the 
Establishment Division about the present practice followed in regard to the method of 
                         
 Prime Minister. 

 CHAPTER-5             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 503          
 
 
appropriation of casual leave by the Heads of their Attached Departments and Subordinate 
Offices. From the replies received, the Establishment Division has observed that no uniform 
practice is being followed in this regard. While some officers appropriate their own casual 
leave without reference to the Ministry/Division concerned, and take permission only when 
they have to leave the station, others simply inform the Ministry/Division after the casual 
leave has been availed of. The question of laying down a uniform policy in this regard has 
been examined in the Establishment Division and the following instructions are issued for 
compliance:- 
 
(1) 
The Heads of Attached Departments/Subordinate Offices should obtain, as 
far as possible, prior approval of the Ministry/Division concerned before 
availing themselves of the casual leave, when the purpose thereof could be 
foreseen in advance. 
 
(2) 
In case of unforeseen and urgent circumstances when the casual leave is 
required for one or two days and it is not possible to obtain prior permission, 
he may avail of the leave and send leave application to the authority concerned 
immediately, and may also, if possible, inform the authority on telephone. 
 
(3) 
In special circumstances when even the procedure mentioned at (2) above 
cannot be followed, the officers should appropriate their own casual leave 
and inform in writing, the officer concerned in the Ministry/Division as early 
as possible. 
 
2.  
As regards the status of officers in the Ministries/Divisions administratively 
concerned to whom the Heads of Attached Departments/ Subordinate Offices should apply 
for casual leave, the normal procedure for applying to the next higher officer should be 
followed. For example, if the Head of the Department/Subordinate Office enjoys the status 
of Deputy Secretary to the Federal Government or is of equivalent rank, he may apply to the 
Joint Secretary of the Ministry/Division concerned and so on. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. D-671/71-F.I, dated 29th December, 1972]. 
 
12.8 
Absence from Office Due to Curfew  
to be Treated as Casual Leave 
 
During curfew/emergency, such absence should be treated as Casual Leave but not 
debited to the causal leave account. 
[Authority:- Establishment Division‘s O.M. No.8/2/69-F.1, dated 12-03-1969] 
 
12.9 
Grant of Casual Leave Ex-Pakistan 
 
It has been decided that the authority competent to grant leave to a Government 
Servant can also permit him to avail himself of casual leave ex-Pakistan in special 
circumstances subject to the condition that the limit of 20 days casual leave as prescribed is 
not exceeded. 
[Authority:- Home Affairs Division‘s O.M. No.9/10/54-Public, dated 27-01-1955] 
 

Page - 504             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                     CHAPTER-5              
 
 
12.10 Grant of Casual Leave to Government  
Servants Deputed Abroad 
 
According to the administrative instructions in Para V (2) of Appendix 3 of the 
Fundamental and Supplementary Rules, Volume II, casual leave must not be granted to a 
Government Servant so as to cause evasion of the rules regarding return to duty.  Similarly, 
according to Government Order under F.R 51-A, the grant of return passage to Pakistan on 
conclusion of deputation abroad is conditional on the official's return to duty forthwith on the 
conclusion of the deputation, unless the arrangement to the contrary effect had been specially 
permitted at the time the deputation closes, or is about to close, and the proposed leave is 
begun. A question had been raised as to whether in view of these instructions, the grant of 
casual leave to a Government Servant deputed outside Pakistan on temporary official duty or 
on training, either before the commencement or after the expiry of the sanctioned period of 
deputation, which, would have the effect of extending his stay outside Pakistan, would be in 
order.  It is clarified that although there is no absolute bar on the grant of casual leave outside 
Pakistan in such cases, it should, ordinarily be discouraged and should be allowed only in 
exceptional circumstances. 
[Authority:- Finance Division‘s O.M. No.F.8 (7)-R.2 (Rwp)/61, dated 17-11-1961] 
 
12.11 Grant of Leave to Officers in BPS-22  
other than Secretaries and Heads of  
Departments in BPS-22 
 
The Secretaries of Ministries/Divisions sanction leave to officers in BPS-22 and 
equivalent, other than Special Secretaries and Heads of Departments in BPS-22, posted 
under their respective charge. 
 
2. 
All orders passed in exercise of the powers as delegated, should invariably 
be endorsed to Establishment Division. 
[Authority:- Establishment Division‘s O.M. No.10/15/2000-R.2, dated 29-10-2001] 
 
 
13.1 Grant of Leave to Secretaries, Heads of  
Departments and Heads of Autonomous/ 
Semi-Autonomous Bodies/Corporations 
The following procedure for grant of leave to Secretaries to Federal 
Government, Heads of Departments and Autonomous Bodies shall be followed:– 
(i) 
All requests for grant of leave on full pay (LFP) including leave ex-
Pakistan, to Secretaries of Ministries/Divisions, Heads of Departments in 
BPS-22, and Heads of Autonomous Bodies in M-I shall be submitted to 
Minister Incharge of the respective Ministry/Division who will be 
competent to grant LFP subject to title. 
(ii) 
All requests for leave from officers mentioned at (i), should also suggest 
specific arrangements for entrusting the work of the Secretary or Head of 
Department or Autonomous Body, as the case may be, during the period 
of leave. The Minister may approve for a maximum period of three 

 CHAPTER-5             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                      Page - 505          
 
 
months following temporary arrangements for entrusting the work of the 
officer proceeding on leave to another officer: 
(a) 
current charge of the duties of the post may be given to the most 
senior officer available within the organization, and  
(b) 
where an officer of an appropriate seniority and background is not 
available within the organization, the work may be entrusted to 
another officer of the same status working under the charge of the 
Minister. 
(iii) All requests for grant of LFP to Heads of Departments in BPS-21 and 
below and Heads of Autonomous Bodies in M-II and M-III, shall be 
decided by the Secretary of the respective Ministry/Division. 
(iv) All orders passed in exercise of the powers delegated at (i), (ii) and (iii) 
above should invariably be endorsed to Establishment Division. 
[Authority:- Establishment Division‘s O.M.No. 10/15/2000-R.2, dated 08-04-2000] 
13.2 
Grant of Leave to Secretaries, Heads of  
Departments and Heads of Autonomous Bodies 
Reference Establishment Division‘s instructions regarding grant of LFP 
including leave ex-Pakistan to Secretaries of Ministries/Divisions, Head of Departments 
in BPS 22 and Heads of Autonomous Bodies in M-I issued vide its O.M No. 10/15/2000-R.2, 
dated 8.4.2000. Sub para (i) of the aforesaid instructions read as under: 
―(i)  All requests for grant of LFP including leave ex-Pakistan, to 
Secretaries of Ministries/Divisions, Head of Departments in BPS 
22, and Head of Autonomous Bodies in M-I shall be submitted to 
Minister Incharge of the respective Ministry/ Division who will be 
competent to grant LFP subject to title‖. 
 
2. 
Secretaries of the Ministries/Divisions concerned are competent to grant 
LFP to Heads of Departments in BPS 21 and below and Head of Autonomous Bodies in 
M-II and M-III. Secretaries of the Ministries/Divisions have also been authorized to grant 
leave to officers in BPS 22 and equivalent other than Heads of Departments in BPS 22 
posted under their respective charge vide Division‘s O.M No. 10/15/2000-R-2, dated 
29.10.2001. 
 
3. 
Procedure for visits abroad by Government officials has been prescribed 
separately vide Cabinet Division‘s D.O. Letter No. F.9-148/2002-Min, dated 19th 
February, 2003. According to para 2 of the said instructions, visits abroad by the 
Secretaries/Additional Secretaries Incharge of the Ministries/ Divisions and Head of 
Autonomous/Semi-Autonomous Bodies and Corporations in MP-I Scale shall require 
prior approval of the Prime Minister. 
 
4. 
A question has arisen as to whether *LFP including leave ex-Pakistan to 
Secretaries/Additional Secretaries Incharge of the Ministries and Head of Departments in 
                         
Leave on Full Pay. 

Page - 506             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                     CHAPTER-5              
 
BPS 22 and Heads of Autonomous Bodies in MP-I Scale shall be granted by the Minister 
Incharge or such leave would require approval of the Prime Minister. 
 
5. 
The matter has been considered. It is accordingly clarified that grant of 
LFP* including leave ex-Pakistan to Secretaries/Additional Secretaries Incharge of the 
Ministries/Divisions, Head of Departments in BPS 22 and Head of Autonomous in MP-I 
Scale shall be granted by the Minister Incharge. Whereas, for official visits abroad only 
i.e. participation in international conferences, meetings, seminars, workshops etc. by the 
Secretaries/Additional Secretaries Incharge of the Ministries/Divisions, Heads of 
Department in BPS 22 and Heads of Autonomous Bodies in MP-I Scale, the prior 
approval of the Prime Minister shall be required. 
[Authority.— Estab. Div‘s OM No. 10/15/2000-R.2., dated 30th March, 2006]. 
Sl.No. 14 
Expeditious Processing of Cases Where a Medical Authority Certified that a 
Government Servant is Permanently Incapacitated for Service 
 
According to the provisions contained in FR 10-A, the competent authority is 
empowered to retire, from service, a government servant, if a medical authority certifies 
that the government servant is permanently incapacitated for further service. The cases of 
such government servants are to be processed expeditiously. As such, Ministries/ 
Divisions may process such cases expeditiously for seeking orders of the competent 
authority. 
[Authority:- Establishment Division‘s O.M. No.14/2/95-R.2, dated 18-10-2000] 
Sl.No. 15 
Employment of Government Servants with NGOs or Private Organizations within 
Pakistan 
Refer to Establishment Division‘s of even number dated 11-06-2001 on the 
subject cited above and to state that the competent authority has been pleased to desire 
that existing policy regarding grant of permission to Government servants to work with 
NGOs/private sector organizations, firms, establishments or persons on leave/EOL basis 
allowed through Establishment Division‘s O.M.No.F.9/4/66-E.5 (DMG), dated 11-06-
2001 is cancelled forthwith. Further, the Government Servants who have already been 
granted such permission/leave etc. be advised to report back for duty as soon as their 
leave/existing contract with private employers expire.  
2. 
Ministries/Divisions are requested to bring the above policy decision in the 
notice of attached departments/sub-ordinate offices under their administrative control for 
strict compliance with immediate effect. 
[Authority:- Establishment Division‘s O.M.No.F.9/4/99-E.5(DMG) dated 28th August,2002]. 
___________________ 
                         
*Leave on Full Pay. 

CHAPTER 6   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TRANSFERS, POSTINGS AND  
ROTATION  
(507-508) 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 509 
 
 
CHAPTER 6 
 
TRANSFERS, POSTINGS AND ROTATION 
 
Sl. 
No(s). 
Chapter Contents 
Page  
No(s). 
  
I. POSTING & TRANSFER 
  
 
1.1 
General Conditions Regarding Postings, Transfers and Deputation
515 
 
1.2 
Policy Guidelines for Postings/Transfers of Officers ........................
515-516 
 
1.3 
Normal Tenure of Posting ......................................................................
516-517 
 
1.4 
Normal Tenure for an Officer on the Same Job/Post ..............................
517 
 
1.5 
Posting of Officers in Pakistan Missions Abroad ...................................
517-518 
 
1.6 
Guidelines for Selection of the Officers for Posting Abroad in 
Pakistan Missions....................................................................................
518-519 
 
1.7 
Uniform Treatment of Officers Proceeding Abroad to Pursue Higher 
Studies .....................................................................................................
519 
 
1.8 
Uniform Treatment of Officers Proceeding Abroad to Pursue Higher 
Studies .....................................................................................................
520 
 
1.9 
Procedure for Selection of Candidates for Appointment in Pakistan 
Missions Abroad .....................................................................................
520 
 
1.10 Seeking Reversion to Lower Post for Posting Abroad ...........................
521 
 
1.11 Authorities Empowered to Make Postings and Transfers of Officers 
and Staff ..................................................................................................
521 
 
1.12 Postings and Transfers of Officers who hold the Status of Joint 
Secretary to the Federal Government .....................................................
522 
 
1.13 Instructions on Visits Abroad .................................................................
522 
II. WEDLOCK POLICY 
 
2.1 
Wedlock Policy  ......................................................................................
523 
 
2.2 
Posting of Serving Husband/Wife at the Same Station ..........................
523-524 
 
2.3 
Posting of Unmarried Female Government Servants at the Place of 
Residence of Parents/Family ..................................................................
524-525 
 
2.4 
Posting of Married Female Government Servants at the Place of 
Residence/Posting of Their Husbands Who are Not in Government 
Employment ............................................................................................
525-526 
 
2.5 
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for Disposal of Cases of 
Deputation Under Wedlock Policy .........................................................
526-527 
III. ROTATION POLICY 
 
 
3.1 
Rotation Policy For  PAS/PSP Officers .........................................
528-533 
 
3.2 
Policy Guidelines for Foreign Appointments and Postings in 
Pakistan Missions Abroad and Against Pakistan’s Seats in 
International, Multilateral, Bilateral and Regional Organizations, 
FORA and Bodies ...................................................................................
533-534 
 
 
 
 
 

Page - 510                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                             CHAPTER-6     
 
 
Sl. 
No(s). 
Chapter Contents 
Page  
No(s). 
 
IV. IMPLEMENTATION OF TRANSFER/POSTING ORDER 
 
 
4.1 
Implementation of Transfer Orders of Officers ................................
4.2 
Posting and Transfer of Officers .......................................................
 
4.3 
Surrender of Section Officers Without Issue of Notification by 
Establishment Division .....................................................................
535 
535 
 
536 
 
V. GRANT OF LEAVE 
 
5.1 
Grant of Leave to Transferred Officers........................................
537 
 
5.2 
Grant of Leave and Notification of Transferred Officers .......................
537 
 
5.3 
Charge Report by Officers Proceeding on Transfer ...............................
537 
 
VI.  DIPLOMATIC STATUS TO CIVILIAN OFFICERS 
 
 
6.1 
Diplomatic Status to Civilian Officers of Other Ministries/ Division
538 
 
6.2 
Premature Transfer of Government Servants Between Pakistan and 
 
Pakistan Missions Abroad ......................................................................
538-539 
 
VII. APPLICATIONS FOR SERVICES AND POSTS             
RULES, 1966 & INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
7.1 
Government Servants (Applications for Services and Posts)  Rules,
540-542 
 
7.2 
Failure of the Provincial Governments and Federal Ministries/ 
Divisions to Inform the F.P.S.C. about Withholding of 
Application Within One Month of the Closing Date Not to 
Affect the Candidate's Selection/Appointment .................................
543 
 
7.3 
Recruitment of Candidates on a Pay Higher Than the Minimum 
Scale of the Post ................................................................................
543-544 
 
7.4 
Modifications in Requisitions Placed with FPSC..............................
544-545 
 
7.5 
Change in Requisition for Recruitment Placed with the FPSC .........
545 
 
7.6 
Revised Requisition Form for Direct-Recruitment Through the 
Commission ......................................................................................
545-549 
 
7.7 
Grant of Starting Salary to Candidates after Selection by the 
Federal Public Service Commission .................................................
549-550 
 
7.8 
Recruitment to Posts in BPS 16 and Above ......................................
550 
 
7.9 
General Instructions for Submission of Applications for Various 
Posts- 
Competitive 
Examination-Number 
of 
Chances 
for 
Government Servants who are in Grade-16 and Below .........................
550-551 
 
7.10 Right of Government Servants to Apply for Higher Posts in Other 
Offices .....................................................................................................
551 
 
7.11 Applications of Section Officers ................................................................
552 
 
 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 511 
 
 
Sl. 
No(s). 
Chapter Contents 
Page  
No(s). 
 
7.12 Appropriate Authority for Forwarding of Applications Through 
Proper Channel........................................................................................
552 
 
7.13 Avoidance of Delay in Forwarding Applications of Government 
Servants to the F.P.S.C............................................................................
552-553 
 
7.14 Competitive 
Examinations/Selections 
Held 
by 
F.P.S.C.-
Applications of Departmental Candidates ..............................................
553 
 
7.15 Practice 
of 
Withholding/Forwarding 
of 
Applications 
of 
Departmental  Candidates to F.P.S.C......................................................
553 
  
VIII. (A) TRANSFER TO FOREIGN SERVICE  
 
  
IN PAKISTAN: DEPUTATION 
 
 
8.1 
Explanation of the Term "deputation" ..............................................
554 
 
8.2 
Deputation of Government Servants – Period of Deputation .................
554-556 
 
8.3 
Delegation of Powers in Regard to Deputation of Government 
Servants ............................................................................................
556-557 
 
8.4 
Deputation of Government Servants .................................................
557 
 
8.5 
Deputation Period – Absorption of Deputationists .................................
557-559 
 
8.6 
Deputation of Government Servants – Normal Period of Deputation 
and Extension ..........................................................................................
559-560 
 
8.7 
Terms and Conditions of Deputation of Civil Servants ....................
560 
 
8.8 
Deputation Not a Method of Appointment .............................................
560-561 
 
8.9 
Deputation of Government Servants – Procedure for Extension ............
561-562 
 
8.10 
Terms and Conditions of Deputation of Civil Servants  .........................
562-565 
 
8.11 
Terms and Conditions of Deputation of Civil Servants to Foreign 
Service in Pakistan ..................................................................................
566 
 
8.12 Instructions to Regulate Cases of Transfers/Deputation of Staff from 
One Office to Another ............................................................................
566-570 
 
9.1 
Grant of Deputation Allowance ..........................................................
570-571 
 
9.2 
Clarification About Deputation Allowance ............................................
571 
 
9.3 
Bar Against the Use of the Term "Deputation Allowance" ....................
571-572 
 
10.1 
Right of Reversion to Temporary Government Servants ................
572 
 
10.2 Reversion of Probationers Undergoing Training at the Civil Services 
Academy to Their Former Post...............................................................
572 
 
10.3 
Reversion of Deputationists ....................................................................
572-575 
 

Page - 512                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                             CHAPTER-6     
 
 
Sl. 
No(s). 
Chapter Contents 
Page  
No(s). 
 
10.4 
Lien of Government Servants – Objective and Administrative 
Implications ............................................................................................
575 
 
10.5 
Procedure for Confirmation of Deputationists........................................
575-576 
 
10.6 
Confirmation of Deputationists by Borrowing Offices ..........................
576 
 
10.7 
Counting of Period of Formal Promotion Towards Increment on 
Reversion to Parent Office ......................................................................
576 
 
11.1 
Application of Section Officers for Ex-Cadre Posts ..........................
576-577 
 
11.2 
Deputation of Section Officers Against Other Posts ..............................
577-578 
 
11.3 
Gazetted and Non-Gazetted Technical Services ....................................
578 
 
12.1 
Deputationists from Provincial Governments ...................................
578-579 
 
12.2 
Change in Terms and Conditions of Deputationists ...............................
579 
 
12.3 
Ruling Regarding Employees from Provinces/Authority on 
Deputation to Federation ........................................................................
579 
 
12.4 
Convention Between the Federal Government and the Provincial 
Governments ‘Inter-Se’ Regarding Terms and Conditions of 
Deputationists .........................................................................................
580 
 
12.5 
Appointment of Provincial Government Employees Against BPS 17 
and Above Posts Under the Federal Government ..................................
580-581 
 
12.6 
Posting on Deputation .............................................................................
581 
 
12.7 
Decision on Leave, or Deputation or for any other Purpose out of 
Cadre Position .........................................................................................
581 
 
12.8 
Deputation of Officers/Staff in Gilgit Baltistan of the Federation/ 
Provinces and Vice Versa .......................................................................
581 
 
12.9 
Bar Against Asking Officers by Name for Posting in 
Corporations/Autonomous Bodies .........................................................
582 
13 
Bar Against Allowing Officers to go on Deputation Against Lower 
Posts  
582-583 
 
14.1 
Benefit of Promotion in Parent Cadre while in Foreign Service ......
583 
 
14.2 
Drawal of Rewards, Remuneration and Other Concessions Not 
Specifically Sanctioned...........................................................................
583-584 
 
15.1 
Recovery of Leave Salary and Pension Contribution in Respect of 
584-585 
 
15.2 
Procedure for Recovery of Leave Salary and Pension Contributions ....
585-586 
 
15.3 
Recoveries of Dues from Government Servants in Foreign 
Exchange 
586 
 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 513 
 
 
Sl. 
No(s). 
Chapter Contents 
Page  
No(s). 
  
VIII. (B) TRANSFER TO FOREIGN SERVICE  
 
  
OUT OF PAKISTAN: DEPUTATION 
 
 
16.1 
Receiving or Soliciting Direct Offers of Appointment from Private
587 
 
16.2 
Adequate Circulation of Vacancy Notice – View of Special 
Selection Board .......................................................................................
587 
 
16.3 
Decisions by Special Selection Board ....................................................
588 
 
16.4 
Circulation of Vacancy Notices ..............................................................
588 
 
16.5 
Circulation of Job Descriptions ..............................................................
588 
 
17.1 
Functions of the Special Selection Board ...........................................
589 
 
17.2 
Procedure for Submission of Cases to S.S.B ..........................................
589-590 
 
17.3 
Sparability Certificate .............................................................................
590 
 
17.4 
Requirement of Second Approval by S.S.B ...........................................
590-591 
 
17.5 
Clearance for Posting Abroad or on Deputation ....................................
591 
 
18.1 
Standard Terms and Conditions of Service for Government Serva
591-593 
 
18.2 
Maximum Period of Employment Abroad ................................................
593 
 
18.3 
Extension in Deputation – Decision by Special Selection Board ...........
594 
 
18.4 
Extension in the Deputation of Officers Posted in Pakistan Missions 
Abroad ....................................................................................................
594 
 
18.5 
Option of Premature Retirement by Deputationists Abroad ...................
594 
 
18.6 
Deputation Against Pakistani Posts Abroad ...........................................
595 
 
18.7 
Deputation Against Pakistani Posts Abroad – Proposal for 
Replacement ...........................................................................................
595 
19 
SOPs For Recalling  of Officers posted on Deputation against 
Pakistan’s Positions Abroad............................................................................
595-596 
 
20.1 Deputation of Pakistanis in International Organisations as Short-T
596 
 
20.2 
Consultancy Assignment ........................................................................
597 
 
20.3 
Procedure for Deposit of Consultancy Fee .......................................
597 
 
21.1 
Policy Concerning Promotion of Civil Servants on Deputation  Ab
597-598 
 
21.2 
Policy Governing Civil servants on Deputation Abroad ........................
598-599 
 
 
 

Page - 514                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                             CHAPTER-6     
 
 
Sl. 
No(s). 
Chapter Contents 
Page  
No(s). 
 
21.3 
Size of Family Members of Serving Personnel Selected for 
Secondment Abroad ..........................................................................
599 
 
21.4 Size of Family Members of Serving Personnel Selected For 
Secondment Abroad ..........................................................................
600 
 
21.5 
Size of Family Members for Secondment Abroad ............................
600 
 
21.6 Deputation Abroad Beyond Five Years and Placement in Static List ....
600-601 
 
IX. SERVICE IN INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES 
 
 
22.1 Publicity of Vacancies in International Agencies, Foreign Governm
602 
 
22.2 Deputation of Defence Officers in Civil : Requisition by Name .......
602 
 
22.3 Civil Servants (Service in International Organization) Rules,2016 ......
603-607 
 
22.4 Deployment of Police Personnel in UN Missions .................................
608-609 
 
 
 
______________ 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 515 
 
 
CHAPTER 6 
TRANSFERS, POSTINGS AND ROTATION 
I.   POSTING & TRANSFER 
 
1.1 
General Conditions Regarding Postings, 
 
 
Transfers and Deputation- F.R. 15 
 
(a)  
The Governor-General may transfer a Government servant from one post to 
another; provided that, except– 
(1) 
on account of inefficiency or misbehaviour,  
 
 
or  
(2) 
on his written request, 
 
a Government servant shall not be transferred substantively to, or, except in a 
case covered by rule 49, appointed to officiate in, a post carrying less pay 
than the pay of the permanent post on which he holds a lien or would hold a 
lien had, his lien not been suspended under rule 14. 
(b)  Nothing contained in clause (a) of this Rule or in clause (13) of Rule 9 shall 
operate to prevent the retransfer of a Government servant to the post on 
which he would hold a lien, had it not been suspended in accordance with the 
provisions of clause (a) of rule 14. 
 
Government decision.– Permanent transfers from a higher to a lower scale in 
anticipation of the abolition of a post are not transfers within the meaning of 
F.R. 15. 
[Authority.- Government of India, Finance Div.‘s letter No.F-452-R.I/27, dated 1-2-1928]. 
 
1.2 
Policy Guidelines for Postings/Transfers of Officers 
 
It has now been decided by the President that postings/transfers of officers of 
Grade-17 and above in all Occupational Groups/Services/Ex-cadre posts, etc., will, 
henceforth, be made according to the Rules of Business, 1973 by the respective Ministries/ 
Departments who are responsible for their administrative control. 
 
2.  
The following guidelines may, however, be observed by the Ministries/ 
Departments regarding policy concerning transfers:— 
(1) 
Transfer between Pakistan and foreign countries should normally be made 
only after 3 years. If an officer is required to be transferred earlier than 3 
years, the orders of Establishment Division are required to be obtained.  
                                                          
 President/Prime Minister. 
 BPS. 

  Page - 516                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
(2) 
Officers should not be transferred as a result of their taking leave for short 
periods for rest and recreation for which only acting arrangements should be 
made. 
(3) 
Ordinarily 3 months notice should be given to government servants who are 
transferred from one station to another to enable them to plan their affairs. 
 
3.  
The above instructions may be passed on to departments under the 
administrative control of the Division/Ministry. 
[Authority.- Establishment Secretary‘s D.O. letter No.1/24/78, C.P., dated 30-9-1978]. 
 
1.3 
Normal Tenure of Posting 
 
It has been observed that government instructions with regard to normal tenure for 
an officer on the same job/post issued from time to time are not being followed with the 
result that in some Ministries/Divisions/Departments, officers have continued to work on the 
same desk for unduly long periods. The position has been reviewed and the competent 
authority has laid down the following criteria for posting/transfer of the officers working in 
Ministries/ Divisions and the Attached Departments/Subordinate Offices, Autonomous and 
Semi-Autonomous Organizations, under their administrative control: 
 
I. 
POSTINGS/TRANSFERS WITHIN PAKISTAN 
 
(i) 
The normal tenure of an officer on the same post should be three years. 
 
Posting of an officer on the same post beyond the normal tenure will 
 
require concurrence of the competent authority, in each  case. 
 
(ii) 
Shifting of the officer may be phased in a manner that no dislocation in 
the official work takes place due to large scale transfers. 
 
(iii) 
Ordinarily, three months notice should be given to the officer who is to be 
transferred. Exception may, however, be made in case the officer is required 
to be shifted immediately in the public interest with the approval of the 
competent authority. 
 
(iv) 
Orders for premature transfers in the Ministries/Divisions/Departments of 
 
the Federal Government should be referred to the Establishment Division; 
 
and in the Autonomous/Semi-Autonomous Organizations to the 
 
administrative Ministry concerned. 
 
(v) 
These instructions will not strictly apply to technical and professional 
 
officers/experts recruited for particular posts. However, posting/ transfer 
 
of such officers may also be rotated in their parent departments/cadres as 
 
far as possible in accordance with the rules of the post. 
II. 
Postings/Transfers to Pakistan Missions Abroad (Other Than Posts 
Administered by Ministry of Foreign Affairs) 
 
(i) 
Posts in foreign missions abroad should be filled on the basis of detailed job 
descriptions to be prepared by the controlling Ministry; 
 
(ii) 
The controlling Ministry should prepare a panel of suitable officers for the 
post; 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 517 
 
 
 
(iii) The panel of suitable officers should be considered by a Committee of the 
controlling Ministry including a representative of the Establishment Division; 
 
 (iv) The recommendations of the Committee should be considered by the Special 
Selection Board; and  
 
  (v) The recommendations of the Special Selection Board should be submitted to 
the competent authority for approval. 
 
2.  
Ministries/Divisions are requested to proceed further in the matter of 
postings/transfers as above and bring these instructions to the notice of all departments, 
offices, autonomous/semi-autonomous bodies and corporations under their control for strict 
compliance. 
[Authority.— Estt. Division‘s O.M. No.10/10/94-R.2, dated 22-3-1994]. 
 
1.4 
Normal Tenure for an Officer on the Same Job/Post 
 
It has been observed that a number of officers remain at the same desk for 
considerable period of time.  This arrangement is not administratively desirable as the 
officers holding the same post for a long time tend to develop rigidity in the outlook and 
ideas and do not view the problems with the same objectivity as they normally should. It is, 
therefore, essential that officers should not be allowed to remain on the same job for any 
length of time. Normal tenure for an officer on the same post should be three years and 
should not exceed five years in any case. 
 
2. 
The above orders apply not only to the Ministries and Divisions but also to 
all kinds of organizations, including the Attached Departments and Subordinate Offices as 
well as autonomous bodies and corporations under the administrative control of the various 
Federal Ministries/Divisions. 
 
3.  
As regards the technical officers/experts, if they have been recruited for the 
same post in which they are working, the orders referred to above will not apply.  However, 
if it is possible to rotate such officers, this may be done. 
[Authority.- Establishment Secretary‘s d.o. letter Nos.27/370-F.1, dated 4-11-1970 and 30-6-1971]. 
 
1.5 
Posting of Officers in Pakistan Missions Abroad 
 
Refer to the decision of the Competent Authority in the Chief Executive Secretariat 
on the above subject and to say that the Chief Executive of Pakistan shall be the approving 
authority for all appointments/postings against posts in BS-17 and above, pertaining to 
Ministry of Commerce, Ministry of  Labour, Manpower & Overseas Pakistanis, Ministry of 
Information & Media Development and for posts at the strength of other Ministries/ 
Divisions in Pakistan Missions abroad. 
 
2. 
The Special Selection Board constituted with the approval of the 
Competent Authority in respect of officers in BS-17 and above, shall continue 
functioning as at present. The recommendations of the S.S.B. will be placed before the 
Chief Executive for final approval as mandated by the policy guidelines vide this 

  Page - 518                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
Division‘s O.M. of even number dated 28-12-1981 for posting in Pakistan Mission 
abroad. 
 
3. 
The authorities to approve cases of deputation/employment abroad with 
International Organization/Foreign Governments shall continue to be the same as notified 
vide this Division‘s O.M No.1/25/99-T-IV, dated February 12,2000. 
 
4. 
These instructions may be circulated for strict compliance. 
[Authority:—Establishment Division‘s O.M. No.4/7/81-T-IV dated 25-06-2001]. 
1.6 
Guidelines for Selection of the Officers for  
Posting Abroad in Pakistan Missions 
  
The President has been pleased to approve the following guidelines for selection of 
officers for posting abroad in Pakistan Missions:— 
1. 
Posts will be filled on the basis of detailed job descriptions to be prepared by 
the controlling Ministry. 
 
2.  
The controlling Ministry will: 
 
 
(a) 
prepare a panel of suitable officers for the post on the basis of job 
description from amongst the officers working in or controlled by the 
Ministry; 
 
 
(b) 
[The Ministries /Divisions shall invite nominations and process the 
applications at their own for selection of officers against their posts in 
Pakistan Missions abroad in accordance with Guidelines laid down in 
the Establishment Division‘s OM No. 4/7/81-T-IV dated 28-12-1981. 
Cases for consideration of the Special Selection Board shall be 
submitted to the Establishment Division by concerned Ministry / 
Division, complete in all respects, as usual. The Establishment 
Division shall remain member on the selection board of the Ministry 
and Special Selection Board (SSB)].  
3.  
This panel will be considered by a Committee in the Ministry/Division which 
exercises administrative control of the posts to be filled. The Committee shall 
include a representative of the Establishment Division. 
4.  
The Committee will select, after due scrutiny, a panel of three officers against 
each post, taking into consideration the following factors:- 
(a) 
The selectee fulfills the requirements of the post as detailed in the 
job description. 
(b) 
The selectee is in the same grade as the post to be filled. Officers 
from higher or lower **grades will not be considered. 
                                                          
 Substituted vide Estt: Div.‘s OM No. 4/17/89-T-IV dated 8-6-2012. 
 BPS. 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 519 
 
 
(c) 
The selectee has an overall good record of service particularly during 
the last five years of service. 
(d) 
The selectee is, at least, a graduate or possesses the technical 
qualification required for the job. 
(e) 
Persons within promotion zone within the next 2 years should not be 
considered. 
(f) 
Those likely to retire during the next 4 years should not be considered. 
(g) 
An officer should not be posted abroad more than once. 
 
 
5.  
The panel of three officers selected by the Committee on the above 
  
criteria will be submitted to the Special Selection Board for final selection 
 
including interview. 
6.  
The recommendations of Special Selection Board shall be submitted to the 
President for approval. 
7.  
The Ministries/Divisions are requested to strictly follow this procedure in 
future while recommending officers for posting abroad in Pakistan Missions. 
[Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.4/7/81-TIV, dated 28-12-1981]. 
CLARIFICATION 
 
It is clarified that Ministries/Divisions having administrative control of the post 
shall be responsible for scrutiny of the applications/documents called directly by the Ministry 
or received through the Establishment Division in order to finalize the eligibility of the 
applicant, in the light of the above referred policy O.M. and submit case complete in all 
respect to its Departmental Selection Committee (DSC) for consideration before sending the 
recommendation of DSC to Special Selection Board (SSB). 
[Authority:— Establishment Division‘s O.M. No.4/7/81-T-IV dated 24-04-2012]. 
 
1.7 
Uniform Treatment of Officers Proceeding 
 
 
Abroad to Pursue Higher Studies 
 
Refer to the subject cited above and to state that Prime Minister has been 
pleased to approve that Civil Servants who are selected on open merit scholarship shall 
be dealt at par with those who are selected for Technical Assistance Programme (TAP) 
without differentiation or discrimination 
 
2. 
Moreover, the civil servants may be considered on duty only for one 
degree programme at one level i.e. once each for Masters, M.Phil, Ph.D etc.  
 
 3. 
Policy is effective from its date of issuance (16-12-2015) and is only 
applicable to scholarships/programmes started on or after the date of issuance of 
aforementioned policy.  
 
[Authority.— Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 9/2/2014-T-III dated 16-12-2015.] 
                                                          
 Inserted vide Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 9/2/2014-T-III dated 17-03-2017. 

  Page - 520                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
 
1.8 
Uniform Treatment of Officers Proceeding  
 
 
Abroad to Pursue Higher Studies 
 
Refer to National Assembly Secretariat‘s O.M No. G(524)/Estt.I dated 18th 
February,2020 on the subject cited above and to state that Establishment Division‘s O.M 
No. 9/2/2014-T-III dated 16-12-2015 does not provide the minimum length of service 
required to become eligible to avail open merit scholarship by a civil servant.  
Establishment Division is of the view that since a civil servant availing open merit 
scholarship programme is required to be treated on duty and doesn‘t have to earn leave 
for adjustment of his study period against any kind of leave, therefore, requirement of 
acquiring minimum length of service may not be required. 
 
2. 
It is pertinent to mention here that eligibility of such a civil servant is 
subject to the condition that he/she may have completed his probation period and the 
same has formally been terminated by the competent authority before availing the 
scholarship.  
[Authority.—Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 9/2/2017-T-III dated 27-02-2020.] 
 
1.9 
Procedure for Selection of Candidates for  
Appointment in Pakistan Missions Abroad 
 
Reference Establishment Division‘s O.M. of even number dated 28th December, 
1981 that in order to ensure uniformity in selection of candidates for appointment in 
Pakistan‘s Missions Abroad, the following procedure be adopted by the Selection Committee 
to draw up the panel for submission to the Special Selection Board:— 
1. 
The Selection Committee will allocate marks to be distributed as under:— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     Marks 
 
 
 (i)  Officer‘s Record 
50 
     
 
 (ii)  Assessment by the Committee  
50 
 
(a)  
Interview  
30 
 
(b)  Experience 
20 
 
 
 
  
 
     ____   
 
 
 
                
      
Total                         100 
 
2.  
The evaluation of record shall be computed against the scale of 50 marks in 
accordance with the formula for overall assessment enunciated in the 
Promotion 
Policy 
circulated 
vide 
Establishment 
Division‘s 
letter  
No. 10(3)/81-CP-I(Pt), dated 31st October, 1982. 
 
3.  
The Committee will interview the candidates to assess their fitness for the job. 
 
4.  
Marks for experience should take into account the experience and additional 
qualifications relevant to the job.  No marks need be allocated for the basic 
qualifications required for the post. 
[Authority: Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No.4/7/81-T.IV, dated 18-1-1983]. 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 521 
 
 
 
1.10 Seeking Reversion to Lower Post for Posting Abroad  
 
Instances have come to the notice of Establishment Division where the Ministries/ 
Divisions have been found indulging in the practice of permitting the employees serving 
under them, especially those belonging to the ministerial cadre holding posts of Private 
Secretary, Superintendent, Assistant, *Stenographer etc. to revert to the lower post with a 
view to facilitating their posting in Pakistan Missions abroad. In the recent past a few 
Ministries/ Divisions approached this Division also supporting requests of their employees 
for reversion to lower posts for the purpose of posting abroad. 
 
2.  
The above matter has been given careful consideration keeping in view the 
provisions of section 10 of the Civil Servants Act, 1973 and F.R. 15. It has been held that 
these provisions do not lend any support to voluntary requests of officials for reversion to 
lower posts with a view to winning posting in Pakistan Missions/offices in foreign countries. 
 
3.  
In view of above, it is advised that the requirements of Pakistan 
Missions/offices abroad may be met by restricting selection to holders of corresponding 
posts in Ministries/Divisions. The selection for posting abroad may be made on the basis of 
seniority-cum-fitness by an ad hoc committee to be constituted specifically for the purpose. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.4/8/85-R.6  dated 3-12-1985]. 
1.11 Authorities Empowered to Make Postings  
and Transfers of Officers and Staff  
Officers in Grade 17 and Above 
 
1.  
Apart from first appointments and disciplinary measures, other administrative 
powers will be exercised by the Heads of Departments who should deal with all matters of 
postings, transfers, increments and leave, etc. except in the case of their deputies about 
whom references will be made to government. 
Officers in **Grade 16 
 
2.  
Subject to the observance of general rules regulating the strength of the 
service, the method of recruitment (including consultation with the F.P.S.C. wherever 
required) and the conditions of service, the Heads of Departments will be the appointing 
authority in respect of all services/posts under his jurisdiction and exercise full powers in 
respect of their posting, transfer and discipline. 
Officials in **Grade 1-15 
 
3.  
The Head of the Department will be the final authority in all matters. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.7/ 59-S.O., dated 15-1-1960 read with Sl. No. 6/A of  
Appendix 4 of the Compilation of Fundamental and Supplementary Rules]. 
 
                                                          
* Now Assistant Private Secretary. 
 BPS. 

  Page - 522                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
1.12 Postings and Transfers of Officers who hold the Status 
of Joint Secretary to the Federal Government  
 
Reference Government of Balochistan letter No. 7-1/70-SOI (S&GAD), dated the 
29th January, 1974 on the subject. In cases where the appointing authority is the President/ 
Federal Government, the Provincial Government may issue only notifications of posting/ 
assumption of charge in respect of an officer after his services have been placed at their 
disposal by the Federal Government through a formal notification.  The Federal Government 
is required to be invariably consulted before the services of an officer, whether belonging to 
Provincial Government or to the Federal Government, serving under a province, are either 
replaced or placed at the disposal of the Federal Government. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s Letter No. 35/2/74-AI, dated 9-5-1974]. 
 
1.13 Instructions on Visits Abroad 
 
 
Refer to the subject cited above and to inform that the Prime Minister has 
been pleased to direct as under:— 
a. 
For an officer to be nominated, the Competent Authority shall be the Secretary 
of the Division concerned except in cases of Federal Secretaries in which the 
Competent Authority shall be the Federal Minister ; and  
b. 
Case shall be submitted to the Prime Minister Incharge once the sponsoring 
agency has confirmed participation of the officer, after his nomination by the 
Competent Authority as mentioned at … (a) above.  
[Authority:— Cabinet Division‘s O.M No. 9-148/2002-Min-II dated 22-10-2020]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 523 
 
 
II. WEDLOCK POLICY 
 
2.1 
In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of section 25 of the 
Civil Servants Act, 1973 (LXXI of 1973), read with Notification No. SRO 120 (I)/98, dated 
the 27th February, 1998, the Prime Minister is pleased to direct that the following further 
amendment shall be made in the Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) 
Rules, 1973, namely:— 
 
2. 
In the aforesaid Rules, in rule 20 A after sub-rule (3) the following proviso 
has been inserted and shall deem to have always been so inserted, namely:— 
 
Provided that posting of serving husband and wife at the same station, unmarried 
female government servants at the place of residence of their parents/family and that of 
married female government servants at the place of residence/posting of their husbands who 
are not in government employment shall be exempted from the said rule. 
 
Note:— 
 
Please see Sl.No. 1.2 Chapter-4 as Rule 20-A of Civil Servants (Appointment, 
Promotion and Transfer) Rules,1973. 
[Authority.— Establishment Division‘s SRO 375(I)/2012 dated 16-04-2012]. 
  
2.2 
Posting of Serving Husband/Wife  
at the Same Station 
 
The government has taken note of the socio-economic problems and hardship faced 
by husbands and wives in government service due to posting at different stations of duty, and 
it has been decided to prescribe the following guidelines to facilitate posting of husband and 
wife at the same station: 
 
(i) 
Where a request is made for posting at a different station in the same 
department/service/cadre in which an employee is already serving, the 
request may be accepted subject to availability of a post in the same BPS. 
 
(ii) 
If a request involves temporary deputation to another department, it may be 
processed in consultation with the department concerned, and may be 
accepted on the prescribed terms of deputation subject to availability of a 
post in the same BPS. 
 
(iii) When a request is made for permanent transfer to absorption in another 
department/agency, the request may be processed in consultation with the 
department concerned, subject to the condition that in the event of permanent 
transfer, seniority shall be determined in accordance with the Civil Servants 
(Seniority) Rules, 1993. 
 
(iv) 
If there is a tie between two or more government servants for posting at the 
same station in the same department/unit of an organization, the government 
servant with greater length of service may be preferred. 

  Page - 524                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
 
(v) 
Request for posting by a spouse facing serious medical problems may be 
accorded highest priority. 
 
(vi) 
Spouses already posted at one station, including those posted on 
deputation beyond the prescribed maximum period, may  not  normally 
be disturbed without compelling reasons of public interest. Requests for 
extension of deputation period beyond the permissible limit may be 
considered with compassion if interests of public service would permit. 
2. 
The above guidelines are subject to the following conditions:- 
 
 
(i)    
Posting of husband and wife at the same station should not be 
 
made by dislocation of any government servant already serving 
 
at a particular station unless his transfer is necessitated by 
 
compelling reasons of public interest or within the framework 
 
of general policy of postings and transfers. 
 
 
(ii) 
The prescribed selection authority should be consulted in each 
 
case. 
 
3.  
All government servants whose spouses are in government service may be 
asked to furnish, at the end of every calendar year, the particulars of their spouses to their 
controlling Ministries/Divisions so as to facilitate maintenance of *ICP Charts and up-to-date 
monitoring of the situation. 
 
4.  
The above guidelines may be circulated to the autonomous bodies under the 
charge of Ministries/Divisions for adoption, with such modifications, as may be considered 
necessary. 
[Authority.– Estt. Division‘s O.M.No. 10/30/97-R.II, dated 13-5-1998]. 
2.3 
Posting of Unmarried Female Government Servants 
at the Place of Residence of Parents/Family  
 
It has been brought to the notice of government that unmarried female government 
servants face socio-economic and security problems when they are posted at stations other 
than the place of residence of their parents/family. The government has taken note of this 
difficulty and it has been decided to prescribe the following guidelines for dealing with 
requests of unmarried female government servants for posting at the place of residence of 
their parents/family:— 
 
(i) 
Where a request is made for posting at a different station in the same 
department/service/cadre in which an employee is already serving, the 
request may be accepted subject to availability of a post in the same BPS. 
 
(ii) 
If a request involves temporary deputation to another department, it may be 
processed in consultation with the department concerned, and may be 
                                                          
* Individual Career Planning. 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 525 
 
 
accepted on the prescribed terms of deputation subject to availability of a 
post in the same BPS. 
 
(iii) When a request is made for permanent transfer to absorption in another 
department/agency, the request may be processed in consultation with the 
department concerned, subject to the condition that in the event of 
permanent transfer, seniority shall be determined in accordance with Rule 
4 of the Civil Servants (Seniority) Rules, 1993. 
 
(iv) If there is a tie between two or more government servants for posting at 
the same station in the same department/unit of an organization, the 
government servant with greater length of service may be preferred. 
 
(v) 
Request for posting by an unmarried female government servant facing 
serious medical problems may be accorded highest priority.   
 
(vi) Unmarried female government servants already posted at a station, 
including those posted on deputation beyond the prescribed maximum 
period, may normally not be disturbed without compelling reasons of 
public interest. Requests for extension of deputation period beyond the 
permissible limit may be considered with compassion, if interests of 
public service would permit. 
 
2.  
The above guidelines are subject to the following conditions:- 
 
 (i) 
Posting of unmarried female government servants at the station of 
residence of their parents/family should not be made by dislocation 
of any government servant already serving at a particular station 
unless his transfer is necessitated by compelling reasons of public 
interest or within the framework of general policy of postings and 
transfer. 
 
 (ii) The prescribed selection authority should be consulted in each case. 
 
3.  
It has also been decided that the above guidelines shall also be followed 
by autonomous/semi-autonomous bodies/ corporations etc. under the control of the 
Federal Government. 
[Authority.– Estt. Division‘s O.M. No.10/30/97-R-2, dated 17-12-1999]. 
2.4 
Posting of Married Female Government Servants at the Place of 
Residence/Posting of Their Husbands Who are Not in Government 
Employment 
 
Keeping in view the socio-economic problems and hardships faced by husbands 
and wives in government service due to posting at different stations of duty, the 
Establishment Division issued instructions/guidelines vide its OM No. 10/39/97-R-2, dated 
13.5.1998 and 17.12.1999 to facilitate posting of husbands and wives at the same station and 
the posting of the unmarried female civil servants at the place of residence of then 
parents/families. With a view to facilitating those female government servants whose 
spouses are not in government service or employed in the private sector or unemployed, it 

  Page - 526                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
has been decided to extend the facility to this class of government servants also to the above 
to serve at the place of residence of their spouses irrespective of whether such spouses, are 
employed with the government, private sector, or even un-employed. 
[Authority:– Estt. Div.‘s OM No. 10/30/97-R-2, dated 21-4-2006]. 
 
2.5 
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for Disposal 
 
 
of Cases of Deputation Under Wedlock Policy  
Refer to National Assembly Secretariat‘s Office Memorandum No. 1(1)/2019-
Com-I (Vol-V) dated 06-12-2019 on the subject conveying the recommendations of the 
Standing Committee on Cabinet Secretariat to develop Standard Operating Procedure for 
disposal of cases of deputation in Federal Government Departments under Wedlock Policy.  
2. 
The following Standard Operating Procedure shall be observed for 
disposal of cases of deputation under Wedlock Policy:— 
(i) In terms of the deputation policy of the Federal Government issued vide 
O.M No. 1/28/75-D-II/R-I dated 11-04-2000, the Secretaries of the 
administrative Ministries/Divisions and Heads of Attached Departments and 
Subordinate Offices not below BPS-21 have been delegated powers to 
approve initial deputation of officers upto BS-19 belonging to cadres and 
posts under the administrative control for a period of three years under 
standard terms and conditions of deputation. The   deputation policy is also 
applicable to the cases under Wedlock Policy as well. In terms of rule 6 of 
the Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion & Transfer) Rules,1973, the 
Authority to approve the appointment on deputation of officers in BS-20 & 
above is the Prime Minister.  
(ii) After the lapse of initial three years deputation the case for further extension 
shall be referred to Establishment Division within sixty (60) days before 
completion of initial period of three years.  
(iii) The case for extension under Wedlock Policy complete in all respect 
alongwith following documents should be forwarded to Establishment 
Division for its concurrence:— 
(a) 
Singed application of the applicant.  
(b) 
Prescribed proforma duly filled in from lending and borrowing 
organizations with signatures and official stamps in original.  
(c) 
Copy of approval of initial period of three years deputation.  
(d) 
NOC from the parent department.  
(e) 
Status of the incumbent beyond the initial/approved period of 
deputation i.e. three years.  
(iv) In case where the above mentioned requirements are not fulfilled or parent 
department of the deputationist is not agreed to issue NOC for further 
extension of deputation under Wedlock Policy on following grounds the 
incumbent shall be repatriated to the parent department:— 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 527 
 
 
(a) 
Services of incumbent are required in the parent department on 
account of exigencies of services.  
(b) 
The department concerned cannot fill the post on regular basis on 
account of deputation of its incumbent.  
(c) 
No appointment on deputation basis shall be allowed against a short 
term vacancy.  
(d) 
In the event of repatriation and joining of deputationist to the parent 
department the services of a person so appointed against the 
deputation vacancy is likely to be terminated. 
(v) 
In case where the borrowing Ministry/Division/Department is of the 
consideration that the services of a deputationist are worth retaining in the 
organization, it may forward the case for extension in deputation under 
Wedlock Policy well in time so that the process could be completed before 
the expiry of deputation period.  
(vi) 
No ex-post facto approval shall be granted in belated cases for extension in 
deputation period.  
(vii) 
In case where the deputation of a government servant is under normal terms 
and conditions and during such period his case is converted under Wedlock 
Policy with the concurrence of lending and borrowing organizations.  
(viii) In case where the government servant on deputation is promoted in the 
parent, it would be responsibility of such government servant to actualize 
promotion in accordance with the requirement of the parent department.  
(ix) 
In case of disciplinary proceedings, a government servant on deputation 
under Wedlock Policy, shall liable to be repatriated to parent department 
with the consent of borrowing organization. 
(x) 
The cases of deputation under Wedlock Policy in respect of officers 
belonging to Pakistan Administrative Service and Police Service of Pakistan 
shall be considered in the light of Rotation Policy for these Services.     
[Authority.—Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 10/30/97-R-II dated 28-01-2020.] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  Page - 528                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
III. 
ROTATION POLICY 
 
3.1 
Rotation Policy of PAS/PSP Officers 
 
Article 240 of the Constitution provides for the All Pakistan Service(s) (APS) 
common to the Federation and provinces which was/were in existence immediately 
before the commencing day of the 1973 Constitution. Pakistan Administrative Service 
(PAS) and Police Service of Pakistan (PSP) are the only two All Pakistan Services, 
having sanctioned strength in BS 17 to 22 in the Federal Government, the four Provincial 
Governments and Government of Gilgit-Baltistan (GB). Given the fact that many areas in 
these governments are far flung, geographically dispersed, sharply differing from one 
another culturally, linguistically and administratively, allocation of officers of the PAS 
and PSP to these governments requires careful and objective handling.  
 
2. 
For the purpose of ensuring a transparent, objective and equitable 
framework for transfers and postings, to and from these governments, a policy framework 
known as ―Rotation Policy of PAS/PSP Officers‖ was introduced in the year 2000. This 
framework was amended from time to time and needed a thorough review keeping in 
view the distortions and lacunae that were noticed while implementing this policy 
framework, since its notification. This policy has been drafted keeping in view the issues, 
identified during implementation of the existing policy, based on the broad principles that 
Federation ensures provision of adequate number of PAS/PSP officers against the 
sanctioned posts in the Federation units and the Federal Government besides ensuring 
that all officers are provided opportunities to serve across the federating units before they 
attain the highest levels in governments. Rotation Policy, 2000 shall be replaced with 
Rotation Policy,2020 under the Civil Servants Act,1973, so that rotation of officers 
among various governments becomes an unavoidable undertaking in which creation of 
exceptions is minimized. The Rotation Policy,2020 has been finalized after consultation 
with all governments.  
Application and Exceptions 
 
3. 
The applicability of this policy will be as follows: 
 
a. 
These policy provisions shall be applicable to PAS/PSP officers; 
 
 b. 
There shall be no exception to the application of the policy on any 
   
grounds whatsoever, including gender or marital status except 
where 
  
expressly stated;  
 
c. 
Standard exceptions like personal hardship and spousal location, 
 
which are a norm in many other cadres and departments across the 
 
country, shall not be available to the officers of PAS and PSP, 
given  the primacy, priority and eminence of their service groups and 
 
positions they occupy; and  
 
d. 
Wedlock Policy shall also not be applicable to PAS/PSP officers.  
Objectives: 
 
4. 
The objectives of this policy are: 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 529 
 
 
 
a) 
Based on the experience of operation of existing Rotation Policy 
and the lacunae/distortions observed therein, it is important to 
ensure that  all governments, are served by the PAS/PSP officers in 
various grades.  
 
b) 
The tendency of officers to remain in one government for years by 
 
bringing extraneous pressures is checked and curbed.  
 
c) 
Onus to serve in all the governments on sanctioned posts is equitably 
 
shared by the officers of PAS/PSP.  
 
d) 
Shortage of officers in all grades, of these services, is equally 
 
distributed among all the governments in Pakistan. 
Principles of Policy 
 
5. 
Rotation Policy, 2020 shall regulate transfer/posting of PAS/PSP officers, 
falling in the following categories: 
 
a. 
First allocation, and service after completion of Specialized Training 
 
Programme (STP), in a government other than that of an officer‘s 
 
province of domicile;  
 
b. 
Mandatory service in hard areas for male officers in BS-17 to 19; 
 
c. 
Rotation of officers serving for long continuous periods at one 
 
geographical location;  
 
d. 
Rationalization of shortage of officers in each grade, among all the 
 
governments, by transferring least rotated officers to government(s) 
 
with highest shortage.  
A. 
First Allocation 
 
6. 
First allocation of every PAS/PSP officer shall be made outside the province 
of his/her domicile on the basis of preferences based on seniority/merit and keeping in view 
the vacancies in each government.  
7. 
A male officer shall be required to serve in the provincial 
government/ICT/Gilgit Baltistan until his promotion to BS-18 or for 5 years starting from the 
date he joins the provincial government/ICT/Gilgit Baltistan after STP as AC (UT)/ ASP 
(UT), whichever is earlier; 
8. 
A female officer shall be required to serve in the provincial 
government/ICT/Gilgit Baltistan until her promotion to BS-18 or for 3 years starting from 
the date she joins the provincial government/ICT/Gilgit Baltistan after STP as AC (UT)/ASP  
(UT), whichever is earlier. 
9. 
For PSP officers, the one-year FC posting in BS 17 will be considered as 
period served in the government of initial allocation irrespective of the geographical location 
where the FC posting in BS 17 is undertaken.  
10. 
No transfer of an officer, on any ground to any provincial government/ 
ICT/Gilgit Baltistan shall be allowed until his/her promotion or completion of 5 years in case 
of male officers and 3 years in case of female officers, whichever is earlier.  

  Page - 530                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
11. 
Policy provisions regarding posting of officers, under this section of the 
policy, shall apply to batches who are inducted in PAS/PSP through CSS examination held 
in the year 2020 and onwards.  
B. 
Mandatory Service in Hard Areas 
 
12. 
Every male PAS/PSP officer will have to serve a minimum of two years in 
the hard areas notified by Establishment Division during service in BS 17 to 19. 
C. 
Continuous Service of 10 Years in a Government 
 
13. 
No PAS/PSP officer of BS 20 and below shall be allowed to serve in a 
Government for more than 10 years continuously. In order to determine the length of period 
served in any government: 
 
a. 
The period spend on EOL/earned leave/study leave/OSD/training/ 
foreign deputation/foreign posting shall not be considered as break 
and  will be included, for the purpose of computing the continuous 
period of ten years.  
 
b. 
The time spent by an officer on a post of the Federal Government 
 
located within the geographical limits of the provincial/other 
 
governments shall be counted towards computing his service in that 
 
provincial/other governments shall be counted towards computing his 
 
service in that provincial/other government.  
 
c. 
For the purpose of calculating a break in the continuous period served 
 
by officers currently posted in a government i.e. on the day of 
 
notification of this Policy, following special provision shall be used: 
 
 
 
 
for a period to be considered a valid ‗break‘ within the previous 
 
ten years‘ service. an officer would have served in another 
 
government, and on stations outside the geographical limits of 
 
his/her current government, for at least one year continuously. 
 
Provided that period spent on EOL/OSD/earned leave /study 
 
leave / training/ foreign deputation/foreign posting shall not be 
 
counted towards this one year. 
 
d. 
Once an officer has been compulsorily rotated under this policy, and 
 
posted to a particular government, then: 
 
 
  
(i) 
Male officer shall not return to the government of his previous 
 
ten-year posting, before completing two years at stations of his 
 
posting situated outside of the geographical limits of 
 
government of his ten-year posting. 
 
 
 
(ii) 
Female officer shall not return to the government of her 
 
previous ten-year posting, before completing one year at 
 
stations of her posting situated outside of the geographical 
 
limits of government of her ten-year posting. 
 
 
 
(iii) 
Provided that period spent on EOL/OSD/earned leave /study 
 
leave/ training/ deputation shall not be counted towards these 
 
two years and one year respectively. 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 531 
 
 
 
e. 
The current officers who have served continuously for 10 years or 
 
more in any of the government shall be transferred to other 
 
governments in three phases spanning over six months each and 
 
starting with the officers who have longest tenures in a government. 
 
Female officers will not be relocated in the first phase but transferred 
 
in second and third phase.  
D. 
Least Rotated Transferred First  
 
14. 
To meet further shortage, the officers can be rotated even before completion 
of ten years‘ continuous service in a government on the principle of least rotated transferred.  
 
15. 
Least rotated will be calculated as: 
 
a. 
― On the basis of the time spent posted outside the government in 
which the officer has served the longest. That officer will be 
transferred first who has the lowest percentage of time spent posted 
outside the government in which the officer has served the longest in 
relation to  
his total length of service.‖  
 
b. 
The period spent on any kind of leave/OSD/competitive scholarship/ 
foreign deputation/foreign posting shall not be considered as break 
and  will be included, for the purpose of computing the continuous 
service in a government. 
 
c. 
The time spent by an officer on a post of the Federal Government 
located within the geographical limits of the provincial/other 
governments shall be counted towards computing his service in that 
provincial/other government. The only exception to this rule would 
be the post of Directing Staff in National School of Public Policy, 
CSA and NPA, provided the officer was among the top three (03) in 
his/her batch in the last of the mandatory trainings (NMC,SMC and 
MCMC as the case may be). 
     Illustration: 
Officer A (BS-20) has a total of 25 years service. He has served 15 years 
in Province I, while serving 8 years in Federal Government and 2 years in 
Province II. Thus his cumulative time spent outside the government in 
which he has served the longest (Province I) comes out to be 10 years (or 
40% i.e. 10/25).  
 
 
Officer B (BS-20) has a total of 20 years-service. He has served 11 years 
in Federal Government, while serving 4 years in Province I and 5 years in 
Province II. Thus, his cumulative time spent outside the government in 
which he has served the longest (Federal Government) comes out to be 9 
years (or 45% i.e 9/20). 
 
 
Officer C (BS-20) has a total of 22 years service. He has served 15 years 
in Province I, while serving 3 years in Province II, 2 years in Province III 
and 2 years in Province IV. Thus, his cumulative time spent outside the 
government in which he has served the longest (Province I) comes out to 
be 7 years (or 32% i.e. 7/22). 

  Page - 532                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
 
 
Officer D (BS-20) has a total of 24 years, including 2 years Study 
Leave and one year deputation abroad. He has served 15 years in 
Federal Government (including one-year deputation abroad), while 
serving 3 years in Province I, 3 years in Province II (including Study 
leave) and 3 years in ICT. Thus, his cumulative time spent outside the 
government in which he has served the longest (Federal Government) 
comes out to be 9 years (or 37.5% i.e. 9/22). 
 
 
Thus, the order in which these officers shall be posted to other 
governments will be Officer C, Officer D, Officer A and Officer B. 
16. 
Government may transfer any officer from any government, and post 
him/her to any government, at any time in his/her career keeping in view the exigencies 
of governance, before completion of 10 years‘ continuous service in a government.  
17. 
Shortage of officers, alongwith the numbers required for equalizing the 
shortage ratio, in all governments viz-a-viz sanctioned posts in each grade shall be 
worked out by Establishment Division in January and July of each year.  
Enabling Provisions 
18. 
Notwithstanding anything contained in this policy, Government may 
transfer a BPS 21 or 22 officer from any government and may post him/her to any other 
government keeping in view the exigencies of governance.  
19. 
Officers proceeding on any kind of leave/competitive scholarship/ foreign 
deputation/foreign posting for a period of one year or more shall report to Establishment 
Division before proceeding on the same.  
20. 
Grade-wise Lists of Officers for rotation shall be prepared by 
Establishment Division twice a year, in the months of January and July.  
21. 
Shortage of Officers, alongwith the numbers required for equalizing the 
shortage, in all governments viz-a-viz sanctioned posts in each grade shall be worked out 
by Establishment Division in January and July of each year.             
Conditions Related to Promotions 
22. 
For the purpose of eligibility for promotion BS-19, service of at least 5 
years and 3 years outside of the province of domicile shall be compulsory for every male 
and female officer respectively. This condition, however, shall be applicable on the 
batches who are inducted in PAS/PSP through CSS examination in the year 2020 and 
onwards. 
23. 
A male officer shall not be considered eligible for promotion to BS-20 by 
Central Selection Board if he has not served in a hard area, to be notified by 
Establishment Division, for at least 2 years during the entire career as a PAS/PSP officer. 
This provision shall become applicable after three years from the date of notification of 
this Rotation Policy, PAS/PSP officers having completed 14 years of service in BS-17 
and above, after notification of this Rotation Policy, shall be rotated to hard areas based 
on seniority forthwith so as the provide adequate opportunity to all officers to serve 2 
years in hard areas before they are due to be considered for promotion to BS-20. 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 533 
 
 
24. 
An officer shall not be considered eligible for promotion to BS-21 by a 
Central Selection Board if he/she was serving in a government/ within geographical 
limits of the Government continuously for more than 10 years until he/she has been 
transferred out of that government and has served for at least one year in another 
government outside the geographical limits of the government of 10 or more years stay. 
This provision, however, shall become applicable after two years from the date of 
notification of this Rotation Policy. 
25. 
These conditions related to promotion will be duly observed under rule 6 
(1) (d) of the Civil Servants Promotion (BPS-18 to BPS-21) Rules,2019. 
ANCILLARY PROVISIONS 
26. 
Wedlock Policy shall not apply to PAS/PSP officers in relation of 
Rotation Policy; instead, spouses shall be posted closest to places of posting of PAS/PSP 
officers and not vice versa. 
27. 
Offices shall be allowed to retain at least one Government 
accommodation anywhere in the country for settling their families. Subject to availability 
suitable accommodation shall be made readily available to the offices transferred to other 
governments.  
28. 
Hard area incentives for Balochistan & Gilgit Baltistan, as already 
notified, shall remain intact and shall also apply to any other hard area to be notified by 
Establishment Division with approval of the Prime Minister.  
29. 
The Rotation Policy 2020 shall come into force w.e.f. 1st January, 2021. 
Rotation Policy, 2000, and all amendments made therein from time to time, shall be 
repealed on the notification of this policy. However, all orders/notifications made under 
the Rotation Policy 2000, as amended from time to time, shall continue to hold force. 
[Authority:— Establishment Division‘s Notification No. 10/02/2018-E-5 (PAS) dated 05-08-2020.] 
 
3.2 
Policy Guidelines for Foreign Appointments and Postings in Pakistan 
Missions Abroad and Against Pakistan‘s Seats in International, 
Multilateral, Bilateral and Regional Organizations, FORA and Bodies  
 
The Prime Minister has been pleased to approve the following guidelines for 
foreign appointments and postings in Pakistan Missions Abroad and against Pakistan‘s seats 
in international, Multilateral, Bilateral and regional organizations, Fora and Bodies:— 
i. 
For the purpose of these policy guidelines, ―foreign posting‖ means and 
includes, but is not limited to, foreign appointments and postings in Pakistan 
Missions Abroad and against Pakistan‘s Seats in International, Multilateral, 
Bilateral and Regional Organizations, Fora and Bodies; but does not include 
foreign postings related to defence, intelligence and security affairs and 
foreign posts which are the cadre posts of any service, cadre or occupational 
group; 
ii. 
The services, cadres and occupational groups, eligible for selection against 
each foreign post, against which foreign posting is made, will be clearly 
defined and identified by the concerned Ministry or Divisions, keeping in 
view the job description and responsibility of each foreign post vis-à-vis 
services, cadres and occupational groups, the officers of which generally 

  Page - 534                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
possess the qualification, experience and skills necessary to fulfill these 
responsibilities efficiently; 
iii. 
The concerned Ministry or Division, in each case, shall ensure that selection 
process is completely transparent and absolutely merit-based. Such 
transparency and merit shall be clearly visible from the processes, 
procedures and practices that are adopted for selection; 
iv. 
All foreign posts that are vacant and available or are likely to become vacant 
and available within one year of the date of circulation of such vacancy, will 
be circulated amongst the officers of the identified services, cadres and 
occupational groups, clearly specifying eligibility criteria in terms of 
educational qualifications, experience, age and so forth; 
v. 
There shall be a precondition of passing a written qualifying test, but the test 
shall be organized by the concerned Ministry through the Lahore University 
of Management Sciences, Lahore or the Institute of Business 
Administration, Karachi; 
vi. 
The minimum qualifying score in the written test will be set at 60 percent; 
vii. 
Candidates qualifying the test will be called for an interview, which will be 
conducted by a committee to be constituted with the approval of the Prime 
Minister; 
viii. 
[Sixty percent weightage will be given to the written test scores and forty 
percent weightage to the interview scores; 
ix. 
Fifty percent passing marks in the interview, and the candidates scoring less 
than the required threshold shall be deemed to have failed to qualify for the 
position;] 
x. 
Successful candidates shall be given, in order of their merit, comprising of 
summation of scores in written test and interview, the option to choose the 
station of their choice from amongst circulated stations; 
xi. 
The tenure fixed for each foreign post shall be strictly followed and will not 
be extendable; 
xii. 
An officer of identified services, cadres and occupational groups for any 
foreign post will be eligible for two tenures of foreign posting in his entire 
service, provided that there shall be an intervening period of at least three 
years between two such tenures; 
xiii. 
No relaxation or exceptional to the above policy guidelines shall be granted 
without prior approval of the Prime Minister for which the concerned 
Ministry shall provide detailed justifications in a summary; and,  
xiv. 
Failure to initiate and complete the process of selection of new officers, prior 
to completion of tenures of incumbents shall be the personal responsibility 
of the concerned Secretary.  
 
2. 
The Ministries/Divisions are requested to strictly follow this procedure in 
future while recommending officers for posting abroad in Pakistan Missions and against 
Pakistan‘s seats in International, Multilateral, Bilateral and Regional Organizations, Fora 
and Bodies.  
[Authority:— Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 4/3/2016-T-IV dated 16-02-2016]. 
                                                          
 Para-1(viii,ix) amended vide Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 4/3/2016-T-IV dated 21-10-2020. 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 535 
 
 
 
IV.  IMPLEMENTATION OF TRANSFER/POSTING ORDER 
 
4.1 
Implementation of Transfer Orders of Officers 
Attention is drawn to office Memorandum No. 10/1/85-R.2. dated 11th 
November, 1985 issued by the Establishment Division whereby it was conveyed that 
under current procedures in force the Ministries/Divisions etc. on receipt of transfer 
orders of an officer were to relieve the incumbent within one week with the responsibility 
of such action lying with the head of office. In case it was not possible to relieve the 
officer under transfer within a week, a reference was to be made to the Establishment 
Division by the head of the Ministry/Division concerned explaining the circumstances 
due to which it was not possible to relieve the officer and when he would be relieved.  
2. 
The tendency of not honouring the Notifications issued by the 
Establishment Division puts Establishment Division in an embarrassing position besides 
creating administrative difficulties/problems for the Ministries/Divisions where such 
officers are being posted. It would be appreciated that whereas the Ministries/Divisions 
have to look after their own interest only, the Establishment Division is required to 
oversee the position of the postings/transfers in all Ministries/Divisions of the Federal 
Secretariat. This situation is accentuated when are faced with shortage of Section Officers 
in the Federal Secretariat.  
3. 
In view of the above it is re-iterated that when orders of transfer of an 
officer serving under a particular Ministry/Division are received he should be relieved 
within a week‘s time. Furthermore, if the transfer of an officer is pending with your 
Ministry /Division the same may please be implemented immediately, failing which 
disciplinary action may be taken against the officer under transfer.  
[Authority:—Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 6/3/92-OMG-II dated 06-12-1993] 
 
4.2 
Posting and Transfer of Officers 
The instructions issued by Establishment Division vide O.M. No. 16/1/85-R-2 
dated 11th November 1985 and D.O letter No. 6/3/92-OMG-II dated 6th December, 1993 
and to the state that instances have come to the notice of the Government where 
officers(s) on promotion or transfer to other Ministry(s)/ Division(s) are not relieved 
promptly by the offices where they were serving to enable them to take up their new 
assignments. Similarly, in certain cases, the transferred officers are not taken on 
charge/accepted in their new assignments on one pretext or the other. This tendency of 
not honoring Notifications issued by Establishment Division, in the public interest, 
creates administrative difficulties/ problems for the Ministries/Divisions where such 
officers are being posted. 
2. 
In view of above it is once again reiterated that whenever orders of 
transfer/posting of an officer received these should be implemented in letter and spirit. In 
case of non-compliance Establishment Division will be constrained to take action against 
the officers under transfer. 
[Authority:— Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 1/1/2014-OMG-II dated 24-03-2014] 
 

  Page - 536                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
4.3 
Surrender of Section Officers Without Issue 
of Notification by Establishment Division  
The 
Establishment 
Division 
have 
noticed 
a 
tendency 
among 
Ministries/Divisions that when they are not satisfied with the performance of a Section 
Officer they surrender the officer without consulting the Establishment Division and do 
not wait for issue of formal notification by the Establishment Division. This action 
creates a problem for the Establishment Division because the officer report to the 
Establishment Division and Establishment Division has to pay them salary for the period 
till they are posted elsewhere, thus unnecessarily burdening the budget of the 
Establishment Division. 
2. 
The Establishment Division have decided that Ministries/Divisions should 
not surrender Section Officers unless and until a proper notification has been issued by 
the Establishment Division. If a Section Officer is not desired to be retained by any 
Ministry/Division, a formal request indicating specific reasons for surrender may be 
intimated in the first instance, and after issue of notification, the officer may be relieved 
for joining his new posting. If , however, any Ministry surrenders an officer without 
waiting for a proper notification from the Establishment Division, Establishment Division 
will not be obliged to provide a replacement section officer to the Ministry.  
[Authority:—Establishment Division‘s d.o letter No. 1/1/86-OMG.II. dated 20-02-1986] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 537 
 
 
V.  GRANT OF LEAVE 
 
5.1 
Grant of Leave to Transferred Officers  
 
It has been decided that, in future, an officer transferred to another post, either in 
the Federal Secretariat, its Attached Departments or Subordinate Offices, or to a post 
under a Provincial Government on reversion from the charge should not be allowed leave 
for any period, except by the authority to whose control he is transferred. 
[Authority:– Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No. 6 (21)/ 60-E.IX, dated 8-10-1960]. 
 
5.2 
Grant of Leave and Notification  
of Transferred Officers 
 
Doubts have arisen as to who should sanction and notify the leave in the case of 
officers referred to in the Establishment Division‘s Office Memorandum No.6 
(21)/60-E.IX, dated the 8th October, 1960. The intention is that, after the date of issue of 
transfer orders, leave should be allowed and notified only by the authority under whose 
control the officer transferred has to go. 
[Authority.– Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 8/20/ 60-F.I., dated 30-11-1961]. 
 
5.3 
Charge Report by Officers Proceeding on Transfer  
 
Officers proceeding on long leave, transfer or retirement are required to sign a 
certificate of transfer of charge (Form TR-I) under Rule 114 of General Financial Rules, 
Vol.-I. In cases where the transfer of charge involves assumption of responsibility for 
cash, stores, etc., the instructions laid down in rule 44 of Treasury Rules, Volume-I and 
rules 115 and 150 of the General Financial Rules, Vol.-I are followed. As regards 
maintenance and handing/taking over of classified and accountable documents adequate 
instructions exist vide paras 25 to 29 of the booklet ―Security of Classified Matter in 
Government Departments‖. 
 
2.  
There is, however, no institutional arrangement in the Federal Secretariat 
under which an officer, proceeding on long leave, transfer or retirement should leave 
behind a memorandum on matters of importance concerning his charge, for the benefit of 
the successor. Consequently, the successor has now himself to grope and find out major 
development about various issues relating to his office, either incidentally or as and when 
they force his attention because of their urgency or importance. This lack of institutional 
arrangement could affect adversely proper perspective or continuity in the handling of 
problems at different levels. 
 
3.  
It has, therefore, been decided that, apart from the procedure being 
followed in respect of cash, stores etc. mentioned in para 1 above, the officer proceeding 
on leave, transfer or retirement should also prepare a brief note (Note to successor) 
describing important cases, major issues and the directions in which they are developing 
and any other matter that his successor should know. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. F. 8/6/ 74-F.I., dated 7-2-1974]. 
 
 
 

  Page - 538                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
VI.    DIPLOMATIC STATUS TO CIVILIAN OFFICERS 
 
 
6.1 
Diplomatic Status to Civilian Officers of Other Ministries/ 
Divisions Posted in Pakistan Missions Abroad 
 
In consultation with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs it has been decided that 
following formula regarding grant of Diplomatic Status shall be applicable to those 
civilian officers of Ministries/ Divisions who are/shall be posted to Pakistan Missions 
abroad:- 
 
(1) 
Second Secretary (Junior   
Grade-17. 
 
       
*Grade or any  designation  
 
 
in future). 
 
 
 
 
(2) 
Second Secretary  
 
*Grade-18. 
 
 
(Senior *Grade or any  
 
 
designation in future).  
 
 
 
(3) 
First Secretary.   
 
At 
least 
5 
years 
service 
in 
*Grade-18 & cleared by the Special 
Selection 
Board 
in 
case 
of 
non-FAG officers. 
 
(4) 
Counsellor. 
 
 
*Grade-19. 
 
(5) 
Minister. 
 
 
*Grade-20. 
 
2.  
It has also been decided that on the appointment of officers to foreign 
missions not only their seniority in accordance with the formula but also their suitability 
for appointment at that senior level would be taken into account. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No.4/16/80-T.IV, dated 8-10-1981]. 
6.2 
Premature Transfer of Government  Servants  
Between Pakistan and Pakistan Missions Abroad 
 
In 1958, the Establishment Division decided, in pursuance of the 
recommendations of the Economy Committee that the transfer of officers between the 
two zones of Pakistan and between Pakistan and foreign countries should normally be 
made after three years.  If a transfer was unavoidable before the expiry of this period, 
sanction of the Cabinet Secretariat (Establishment Division) should be obtained 
invariably before the transfer orders were issued by the administrative Ministry.  The 
Establishment Division reiterated these instructions from time to time. 
 
2.  
This Ministry felt that transfer of officials within the two zones of the then 
Pakistan stood on an altogether different footing from transfer of officials from Pakistan 
to Missions abroad and vice versa.  The exigencies of service, such as inadequacy of staff 
for certain types of posts, the special suitability of certain officers for certain Missions, the 
almost continuous re-organization of Missions abroad, etc. made it well-nigh impossible to 
rigidly adhere to the principle of three years‘ tenure abroad.  However, the Establishment 
                                                          
 BPS 
 Foreign Affairs Group; now Foreign Service of Pakistan. 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 539 
 
 
Division were not agreeable to exempt this Ministry from the operation of the instructions in 
question. 
 
3.  
The Secretary (Administration) discussed the case with the Establishment 
Secretary, when the latter agreed to exempt this Ministry from the application of the said 
restraint. It may be stated in this connection that in many cases orders of premature transfers 
are issued under the directions of the Prime Minister. In the case of Heads of Missions all 
orders of appointment and recall/transfer are issued in accordance with the directives of the 
Prime Minister. 
 
4.  
The Establishment Secretary may kindly see for his formal concurrence in 
the proposed exemption of this Ministry from the requirement of obtaining prior approval of 
the Establishment Division in cases of premature transfer of officials between the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs and the Pakistan Missions abroad. 
[Authority.-  Ministry of Foreign Affairs U.O. Note No. Rules-1/3/76, dated 3-5-1976 and  
Estt. Division  U.O. Note No. 6/2/70-CV, dated 5-5-1976]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  Page - 540                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
VII. 
APPLICATIONS FOR SERVICES AND POSTS RULES, 1966 & 
INSTRUCTIONS 
 
7.1 
Government Servants (Applications  
for Services and Posts) Rules, 1966 
 
In exercise of the powers conferred by paragraph (a) of clause (2) of Article 178 
and clause (1) of Article 179  of the Constitution, the President is pleased to make the 
following rules, namely:- 
 
1.  
Short title, application and commencement.– (1) These rules may be 
called the Government Servants (Applications for Services and Posts) Rules, 1966. 
 
(2)  They shall apply to every person who is a member of an All-Pakistan Service 
or holds any post in connection with the affairs of the federation except:- 
 
(a) 
persons to whom the Pakistan Railway Establishment Code applies; and 
 
(b) 
members of such Services and holders of such posts as the Federal 
Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, specify. 
 
(3)  They shall come into force at once. 
 
2.  
Definitions.– In these rules, unless there is anything repugnant in the 
subject or context,– 
 
   (a) 
―competitive examination‖ means a competitive examination held by 
the Federal Public Service Commission or a Provincial Public Service 
Commission for recruitment to any Service or post and includes any 
method whatever adopted for recruitment to the Central Engineering 
Services; and 
 
   (b) 
―temporary Government servant‖ means a person who is temporarily 
employed in connection with the affairs of the Federation, but does not 
include a person employed on contract or on probation  [against a 
permanent post or as probationer of a regularly constituted service]. 
 
3.  
Manner of making applications.– No Government servant shall apply 
for appearing at any competitive examination or for appointment to any post other than 
the post which, he for the time being, holds except–  
 
(a) 
for appearing at a ministerial services competitive examination through 
the head of the office, Ministry or Division in which he is employed; 
and 
 
(b) 
for appearing at a competitive examination other than a ministerial 
services competitive examination or for appointment  to a  service  or 
post to be filled otherwise than by a competitive examination with the 
prior permission in writing of the head of the office, Ministry or 
Division in which he is employed, who may, for reasons to be recorded 
in writing, refuse such permission if he considered that such permission 
would not be consistent with the interests of the public service. 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 541 
 
 
 
4.  
Permission to be given or application to be forwarded not more than 
twice.– (1) Subject to the provisions of rule 3, the applications  of,  or  permission  to,  a  
Government  servant   for appearing at competitive examinations at which he is otherwise 
eligible to appear shall not be withheld or refused, but in no case shall the applications be 
forwarded or permission be granted for appearing at more than two ministerial services 
competitive examinations during any calendar year or at more than two competitive 
examinations other than ministerial services competitive examinations during the whole 
service of a Government servant: 
 
Provided that a Government servant appointed on the results of a competitive 
examination other than a ministerial services competitive examination shall not be 
permitted to apply for such examination more than once during his whole service. 
 
(2)  Subject to the provisions of rule 3, no Government servant shall apply 
more than twice in any calendar year for, or for appearing at any test or interview for 
appointment in, or for the transfer of his services to, a service or post to be filled 
otherwise than by a competitive  examination, in another office, Ministry or Division of 
the Federal Government or under the Provincial Government or a public statutory 
corporation.  
 
(3)  Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rules (1) and (2), the 
applications of, or permission to, a Government servant employed on contract for a 
specified period, for appointment in a Service  or  post or for appearing at a competitive 
examination test or interview, may be withheld or refused if it appears that in the event of 
selection for appointment to any Service or post pursuant to such application, or on the 
result, of such examination, test or interview, such Government servant will have to be 
released before the expiry of his period of contract and that such release would not be 
consistent with the interests of the public service. 
 
5.  
Release of Government servants for appointment to a better Service 
or post.– (1) Where a Government servant who applied in accordance with rule 3 for 
appearing at a competitive examination is selected for appointment on the result, of such 
examination, his release for such appointment shall not be withheld or refused if he is a 
member of a Service in a group and is selected for appointment to a Service in a higher 
group, but not to a Service in the same or a lower group.  For the purpose of this rule, the 
Central Services are grouped in the following descending order:- 
 
1st Group 
 
Civil Service of Pakistan. 
 
 
 
 
Pakistan Foreign Service. 
 
2nd Group 
 
Police Service of Pakistan. 
 
3rd Group 
 
Finance Services eligible for the Economic Pool, viz., 
Pakistan Audit and Accounts Service, Pakistan 
Railway Accounts Service, Pakistan Military Accounts 
Service, Pakistan Taxation Service and Pakistan 
Customs and Excise Service. 

  Page - 542                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
 
4th Group 
 
Pakistan Postal Service (Class I) and Pakistan Military 
Lands and Cantonments Service. 
 
5th Group 
 
Central Secretariat Service (Class I) and other Class I 
Services and Posts. 
 
6th Group 
 
Class II (Gazetted) Services and posts. 
 
7th Group 
 
Non-Gazetted Services and posts. 
ILLUSTRATION 
 
A Police Service of Pakistan Officer shall be released for appointment to the 
Civil Service of Pakistan or Pakistan Foreign Service, but not to any of the Finance 
Services.  A Pakistan Taxation Service Officer shall not be released for appointment to 
the Pakistan Audit and Accounts Service; or a Pakistan Military Lands and Cantonments 
Service Officer to the Pakistan Postal Service (Class I). 
 
(2)  If any person who, before his appointment to a Service of the Centre or a 
post in connection with the affairs of the Centre, had appeared at a competitive 
examination, test or interview or applied for appointment to a Service or post, it is, on the 
result of such examination, test or interview or pursuant to such application, selected for 
and offered appointment to a Service or post other than the one to which he belongs or 
which he holds, his release for such appointment, it desired by him, shall not be withheld 
or refused. 
 
(3)  Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rules (1) and (2), release 
before the expiry of the period of contract of a Government servant employed on contract 
for a specified period may be withheld or refused if such release would not be consistent 
with the interests of the public service. 
 
6.  
Temporary 
Government 
Servants.– 
Notwithstanding 
anything 
contained in these rules, the applications of, or permission to, a temporary Government 
servant for appointment to any service or post or for appearing at any competitive 
examination, test or interview or his release on being selected for any service or post 
pursuant to such application or on the results of such examination, test or interview shall 
not be withheld or refused. 
 
7.  
Exemption.– The President may, in such cases as he thinks fit, exempt 
any Government servant or class of Government servants from the operation of, or relax 
the restrictions imposed by, these rules. 
 
8.  
Repeal.– The Government Servants‘ Applications for posts (Central 
Services) Rules, 1953, as amended from time to time, are hereby repealed.  
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s Notification No. SRO 593 (K)/66, dated 8-6-1966]. 
 
 
 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 543 
 
 
 
7.2 
Failure of the Provincial Governments and Federal Ministries/ 
Divisions to Inform the F.P.S.C. about Withholding of Application 
Within One Month of the Closing Date Not to Affect the Candidate‘s 
Selection/Appointment 
 
In the Establishment Division‘s letter No. 8/54/79/F.I(D.5) dated 5th  August, 
1980 it was requested that the applications, if submitted by Provincial Governments 
employees through proper channel to FPSC, for posts advertised by the Commission, 
should please be forwarded on top priority basis; and in case an application is required to 
be withheld for any reason, the Commission should be informed within one month of the 
respective ―closing date‖ of the applications. 
 
2.  
The FPSC have reported that despite the instructions issued on 5th August, 
1980, the objective has not been achieved. Several candidates, who appeared before the 
Commission on the basis of their ―duplicate/advance copy‖, have told the Commission 
that their original applications fell a prey to the clerical redtapism in their respective 
offices, and their applications could not be forwarded to the Commission. The 
Commission have also complained that in several cases, the Provincial Governments as 
well as the Federal Ministries/Divisions/ Departments informed the Commission about 
the withholding of applications, after the closing date and in certain cases at a stage when 
the employee/ candidate had even been interviewed. It will be appreciated that with such 
state of affairs, not only the efforts of the Commission are wasted, but the talented/ 
suitable candidates are also prevented from selection/ nomination. 
 
3. 
Under these circumstances, it has been decided that:- 
 (i) 
If the Provincial Governments and the Federal Ministries do not inform 
the Commission of their refusal, within one month of the ―closing date‖, it 
will be presumed by the Commission that permission has been granted to 
the employee/ candidate who has applied in advance; and  
(ii) 
In view of (i) above, if a departmental candidate/employee is selected/ 
nominated by the Commission, the parent Government/Ministry/ 
Department/Corporation etc. of that candidate shall be bound to relieve 
him, to enable him to join the post for which he has been nominated. 
 
 
[Authority:– Estt. Div.‘s Letter No.8/54/79-F.1-D.(5), dated 16-8-1981]. 
7.3 
Recruitment of Candidates on a Pay Higher  
Than the Minimum Scale of the Post 
 
It has been decided in consultation with the Ministry of Finance that the 
following procedure shall be adopted in connection with recruitment through the Federal 
Public Service Commission when it is proposed to appoint a candidate on an initial pay 
higher than the minimum of the post and the requisition sent to the Commission admits of 
such higher initial pay being given in suitable cases: 
(i) 
Ordinarily, posts will be advertised on prescribed scales and there need be 
no provision in the advertisement for a higher initial pay being given. In 

  Page - 544                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
all such cases, the appointments must be made on the minimum of the 
scales. No representation for a salary higher than the minimum of the scale 
will be entertained from any person who enters government service in 
response to such advertisement without prior consultation with the Federal 
Public Service Commission and the Ministry of Finance. 
(ii) 
In special cases, however, where due to dearth of suitable candidates or 
where previous attempts to attract candidates on the minimum of the scale 
had failed, it may be felt necessary to provide for a higher starting pay.  In 
such cases, whenever the requisitions for recruitment are sent to the 
Federal Public Service Commission, the prior concurrence of the Ministry 
of Finance must be obtained, if it is intended in deserving cases to provide 
a higher initial pay than the minimum of the advertised scale.  The limit in 
the scale up to which the Federal Public Service Commission may be 
authorised to recommend the starting salary will be laid down by the 
Finance Ministry in each such case. 
(iii) Before a recommendation as to the higher initial pay made by the 
Commission is accepted by the Ministry concerned, the concurrence of the 
Ministry of Finance must be obtained. 
(iv) Normally, no candidate should be given a salary higher than that 
recommended by the Commission.  If, however, in an exceptional case it 
is considered desirable to give a higher salary to a candidate than that 
suggested by the Commission, it will be necessary to obtain the 
concurrence of the Commission before seeking the approval of the 
Ministry of Finance. 
(v) 
Any subsequent recommendation made by the Commission must, before it 
is accepted, have the prior concurrence of the Ministry of Finance. 
 
2. 
The procedure outlined above, will apply to posts to which recruitment is 
made on contract.  Each such case will however, be considered on its merits as regards 
the scale of pay and the maximum of the higher start. 
 
[Authority:– Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.11/4/50-SEI, dated 16-5-1951]. 
 
7.4 
Modifications in Requisitions  
Placed with FPSC 
 
Reference instructions contained in the Establishment Division O.M. No. 
9/3/73-DV, dated 26th November, 1973 and O.M. No. 2/10/74- F.IV, dated 18th  
December, 1974. 
 
2. 
Instances continue to come to notice where after placing requisitions, for 
recruitment with the Federal Public Service Commission, the Ministries/Divisions/ 
Departments have made changes in those requisitions.  In some cases, the number of 
posts notified for recruitment was reduced, in other cases the qualifications notified were 
modified.  There have also been cases where the domicile for the post was changed or the 
requisition altogether withdrawn after the post had been advertised and the candidates 
interviewed. Such modifications in requisitions placed with the Commission are not only 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 545 
 
 
against the instructions issued by the Establishment Division but also place the 
Commission as well as the government in great embarrassment, apart from delay in 
recruitment and wastage of public time and money. It has, therefore, been decided that, in 
future, if for very cogent reasons a requisition placed with the Commission has to be 
amended or cancelled, the reference to the Commission should be made under the 
signature of the Secretary of the Ministry/Division concerned giving the reasons for the 
proposed amendment. A copy of the communication should be endorsed to the 
Establishment Division. 
[Authority:– Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.11/4/76-D.V., dated 17-7-1976]. 
 
7.5 
Change in Requisition for Recruitment  
Placed with the FPSC 
 
Reference.- Establishment Division O.M. Nos. 9/3/73-DV, dated 26-11-73, 
2/10/74-F.IV, dated 18-12-1974 and 11/4/76-DV, dated 17-7-1976. 
 
2. 
It has been brought to the notice of Establishment Division by the Federal 
Public Service Commission that requests for amendment/ cancellation of the requisitions 
for recruitment on the plea of amendment in the recruitment rules are still being received 
by them after the posts are advertised and, in some cases, even after notice for interview 
is issued.  The Commission have observed that such amendments are generally proposed 
to accommodate ad-hoc appointees who otherwise do not fulfill the requirements of the 
relevant recruitment rules. 
 
3. 
As such situations cause embarrassment to the Commission, and result in 
considerable waste of time and funds spent on re-advertisement, it has been decided that 
in future no request for amendment/withdrawal of requisition for recruitment will be 
entertained by the Commission on the plea of an amendment in the recruitment rules. The 
amendments, if any, will have only prospective and not retrospective application. 
 
4. 
With a view to exercising proper check on such requests for amendment, 
cancellation/withdrawal of requisition etc., it has been decided that, in future, all such 
requests should be routed through the Establishment Division by Ministries/ Divisions 
etc. 
[Authority:– Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No.11/4/76-D.V. dated 19-10-1977 and Estt. Division‘s 
O.M.No.2/51/78.D.III, dated 11-7-1979]. 
 
7.6 
Revised Requisition Form for Direct- 
Recruitment Through the Commission 
 
Revised Requisition Form FPSC-21 for use in recruitment of candidates for 
appointment to various posts by interview method only is annexed.  It is requested that in 
future the revised Requisition Form may please be used while forwarding requisition to 
the Commission, instead of the old Forms. 
[Authority:– Federal Public Service Commission‘s letter No.F.16/6/82-RI, dated 4-7-1982]. 
 
 
 

  Page - 546                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
ANNEX 
 
Revised Requisition Form F.P.S.C.-21 
 
 
FEDERAL PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION 
 
---------------------------------(Division) 
 
Requisition for recruitment to the post of----------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
―A‖  
FOR CANDIDATES‘ INFORMATION 
 
(1) 
(a)  
Designation of the post. 
 
 
(b) 
Number of posts to be filled. 
 
 
(c) 
Grade 
 
 
(d) 
BPS 
 
 
(e) 
Special pay (if any). 
 
 
(f) 
Whether higher starting salary admissible if any, upto, and 
necessary prior sanction of the Ministry of Finance has been 
obtained? 
 
 
(g) 
Any other special concessions such as free quarters, light, 
water etc. 
 
(2) 
Whether permanent or temporary. (if temporary period for which it will 
last)? 
 
(3) 
(a)  
Duties. 
 
 
(b)  
Place of duty. 
―B‖  
FOR ADVERTISEMENT 
 
(4) 
Qualifications required (no deviations from notified recruitment rules 
are permissible). 
 (a) Academic:(If more than one qualifications are prescribed, 
preference, if any, as reflected in the recruitment rules). 
 (b) Training. 
 (c) Experience. 
(The prescribed experience counts after acquiring the requisite basic educational 
qualification. Whenever the Ministry/Division consider that the prescribed experience 
gained before acquiring the minimum prescribed educational qualification should also be 
considered as relevant, this should be made clear, and full justification may please be 
given for providing this relaxation in the interest of service). 
 
(5) 
Age Limits. 
 
(a)  
Minimum. 
 
(b)  
Maximum. 
(Any relaxation, whether in Minimum or Maximum age limits). 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 547 
 
 
 
(6)  
Provincial/Regional distribution of post(s) in terms of Recruitment 
Policy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               In figures       
 In words 
 
 
 
Merit *(7.5%) 
 
 
 
Punjab (50%) 
 
 
  ---------- 
   -------- 
 
- 
Sindh (Urban Areas) 
 
 
 
(40% of 19% or 7.6%) 
 
  ---------- 
   --------  
 
- 
Sindh (Rural Areas).  
 
 
(60% of 19% or 11.4%) 
 
  ---------- 
   --------  
 
- 
KPK (11.5%) 
 
 
  ---------- 
   --------  
 
 
Balochistan*(6%) 
 
  ---------- 
   --------  
 
- 
GB/FATA(4%)  
 
  ---------- 
   -------- 
 
 
Azad Kashmir (2%) 
 
  ---------- 
   -------- 
 
(No change in allocation or reduction in the number of posts would be permitted 
so far as this requisition is concerned). 
 
 
Merit *7.5% 
 
 
Punjab (including Federal Area of Islamabad) 50%  
 
 
Sindh 19%  
 
The share of Sindh will be further sub-allocated in the following ratio : 
 
 
Urban Areas, namely Karachi, Hyderabad   
 
 
 
 
and Sukkur 40% of 19% or 7.6%,  
 
 
Rural Areas, i.e. rest of Sindh 
 
 
excluding Karachi, Hyderabad and Sukkur.   
 
 
 
 
60% of 19% or 11.4%. 
 
 
KPK 11.5% 
 
 
Balochistan *6% 
 
 
Gilgit Baltistan and Federally Administered Tribal Areas 
  
 
4% and Azad Kashmir 2%. 
 
(7) 
Are government servants eligible for concession of age, qualifications, 
experience, etc., which are relaxable in their favour, as per notified 
recruitment rules. 
 
(8) 
Any other condition or qualification not covered by above questions. 
 
(9) 
Are women eligible in terms of recruitment rules? If women are to be 
declared ineligible, the Establishment Division‘s prior approval must be 
obtained. 
 
 
                                                          
* Subs. vide Establishment Division‘s O.M. No. 4/10/2006-R2, dated 12th February, 2007. 

  Page - 548                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
―C‖  
OTHER POINTS 
 
(10) 
Have the recruitment rules, including method of recruitment and 
qualifications for the posts been approved by the Establishment 
Division and the Commission?  If so, please state. 
 
 
(a) 
The Gazette Notification No. and date of the recruitment rules. 
 
 
(b) 
Whether the recruitment rules (with amendments if any) amended 
in consultation with the Establishment Division and the 
Commission?  If so, please give the Gazette Notification No. and 
date of all amendments and a copy of the same should be 
enclosed. 
 
 
(c) 
An up-to-date and complete copy of recruitment rules must be 
enclosed with this Requisition. 
 
(11) 
Was this post advertised previously? if so, in which year 
(Commission‘s Consolidated Advertisement No. should be quoted). 
 
(12) 
Name, telephone number and address of Departmental Representative 
will be asked by the Commission about a fortnight ahead when the 
interviews are fixed up. 
N.B.- 
The Departmental Representative should be of the status of Joint Secretary to 
the Federal Government and for the sake of uniformity of assessments of 
candidates, the same Departmental Representative would be required to assist 
the Commission at all interviews centres for a particular appointment. 
 
(13) 
Particulars of the present ad-hoc appointee (s). 
                                                                       
Name 
  Date of 
Qualification 
Experience 
Domicile      Date of  
 
  birth        
 
 
 
 
 
       Ad-Hoc 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
                  Appointment 
 
                                                                                                                    
 
 
                                                                                                             
 
 
(14) 
It is certified that: 
 
 
(i) 
The qualifications, age limits and experience laid down in the 
above requisition are in accordance with the recruitment rules, 
which have been published in the Gazette of Pakistan after 
approval by the Establishment Division and the Federal Public 
Service Commission. 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 549 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
The particulars of ad-hoc appointees have been given in the 
requisition against Column 13.  The ad-hoc appointees fulfill all 
the prescribed qualifications as educational qualification, 
experience, age limits and domicile. 
 
 
(iii) 
The provincial/regional distribution of posts as given against 
item No. 6 is in accordance with the Government Recruitment 
Policy as contained in the Establishment Division‘s O.M. No. F. 
8/9/72-TRV, dated the 31st August, 1973, as amended from time 
to time. 
 
 
 
The allocation of the post has not been changed since it was last 
advertised. The allocation of the post since it was last advertised 
has been changed with the concurrence of the Establishment 
Division, as required in their O. M. No. 8/15/73-TRV, dated the 
28th November, 1973. 
 
 
(iv) 
The requisition has been signed by an officer of the status of 
Deputy Secretary or above. 
 
 
(v) 
Detailed duties of the post against Column 3 of the requisition 
have been mentioned and enumerated. 
 
 
(vi) 
No changes as regards qualification, experience, age, domicile, 
grade, scale of pay, etc., as far as this requisition is concerned 
will be accepted, save in unavoidable circumstances when any 
change in requisition will have to be routed through the 
Establishment Division. Request for such a change will be 
signed by the Secretary of the Ministry/Division and routed 
through the Establishment Division, as required vide O.M. No. 
11/4/76-DV, dated the 17th July, 1976 and No. 2/51/78-DIII 
dated 11th July, 1979. 
 
 
 
 
Signature....................................... 
 
 
 
 
Designation of forwarding authority 
7.7 
Grant of Starting Salary to Candidates after Selection  
by the Federal Public Service Commission  
 
It has been brought to the notice of Establishment Division by the Federal Public 
Service Commission that Ministries/Divisions sometimes approach the Commission to 
recommend starting salary higher than the minimum prescribed for the candidates after 
they have been nominated by the Commission. The position in this respect is stated 
below. 
 
2. 
In case it is intended to grant higher starting salary to incumbent of any 
post, the F.P.S.C. should be informed of such details at the time when the requisition for 
that post is sent to them to enable them to include this provision in their advertisement. 
Further, according to Serial No. 16 of Annexure II to the Ministry of Finance O.M. No. 
                                                          
 Strike out the alternatives not applicable. 

  Page - 550                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
F-1(5)R 12/80, dated the 11th March, 1981*, the F.P.S.C. may recommend the grant of not 
more than six premature increments to a nominee only when suitable persons of requisite 
qualifications are not available on the minimum prescribed pay of the post.  In either case 
the Commission may use its discretion to recommend and to fix the number of such 
increments within the prescribed limit or not to recommend the premature increments. 
 
3. 
As explained above, in cases where the F.P.S.C. has nominated a person 
without recommending premature increments, there is no justification for a Ministry/ 
Division/ Department to ask the Commission for recommendations for such increments. 
 
4. 
Ministries/Divisions are requested to explain the above position to all the 
Departments/Offices under their jurisdiction. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.2/22/75-D-III, dated 31-3-1976]. 
 
7.8 
Recruitment to Posts in BPS 16 and Above 
  
While processing recruitment against various posts in BPS 16 and above under 
the Federal Government, the administrative Divisions/Departments are required to 
nominate professionally competent and senior officers (in BPS 20 or above),as 
Departmental Representatives to assist the Federal Public Services Commission in 
assessing suitability of the candidates. 
 
2. 
FPSC has reported that, over the years, it has been noticed that the 
Departmental Representatives are either not nominated at all or they do not attend on 
specified dates. At times they come late also. Generally, officers of BPS 19 or below are 
nominated. They, very often, do not have the requisite experience and/or lack relevant 
professional/ technical expertise in the field of the advertised post. The Commission is 
not informed about the non-availability of a qualified officer for which last minute 
alternative arrangements are impossible to make. The names/addresses of the 
Departmental Representatives are seldom given, nor are their telephone (Office and 
Residential) numbers provided. Thus the Commission is prevented from reaching them to 
ensure their presence. 
 
3. 
It is, therefore, requested that FPSC‘s instructions in this regard may 
kindly be complied with in letter and spirit so as to avoid any untoward situation in 
future. 
[Authority:– Estt. Div.‘s (Training Wing) Circular No. 3/8/92-T.V. dated 17-10-1993]. 
7.9 
General Instructions for Submission of Applications for  
Various Posts-Competitive Examination-Number of Chances for  
Government Servants who are in *Grade-16 and Below  
 
The government servants in Grade-16 or below who have completed two years 
service and have failed to secure direct entry into **Grade-17 through competitive 
examination have been allowed to take two more chances upto the age of 30 years in 
competitive examination vide Office Memoranda of Establishment Division forming various 
Occupational Groups. This provision is, however, in conflict with the provisions of rule 4 
                                                          
*The latest orders are contained in Finance Division‘s OM No.F.3(2)-Exp.III/2006 dated 13th September, 2006. 
 BPS 
 Add ‗and Services‘. 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 551 
 
 
of the Government Servants (Application for Posts and Services) Rules, 1966.  It has, 
therefore, been decided that rule 4 of the Government Servants (Applications for Posts and 
Services) Rules, 1966 may not be applied in the case of such government servants (in 
*Grade-16 and below) who wish to take two chances in Competitive Examination upto the 
age of 30 years.   
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 1/21/76-T. III, dated 2-8-1976]. 
7.10 
Right of Government Servants 
to Apply for Higher Posts in  
Other Offices  
 
It has been decided that normally officials appointed to a *grade, either by 
promotion or by direct recruitment should – 
 
(a) not be considered for appointment to, and 
 
(b) not be allowed to apply for  
posts in other offices of government or of statutory bodies to a *grade carrying a higher 
*grade, till they have rendered an appreciable length of service in the former *grade. 
 
2. 
This ban will, however, not apply to– 
      
  (i) Appointments made through the Federal Public Service Commission or the 
Central Selection Board; 
 
 (ii) Posts within the normal promotion prospects of the government servant 
concerned, e.g., the posts of Section Officers in the case of Superintendents 
of the Federal Secretariat; and 
 
(iii) Purely temporary government servants who are not likely to be employed 
permanently in the office, Ministry, Division, Service or cadre in which they 
are employed. 
 
3.  
Departures from the above instructions should be made only in special cases. 
 
4.  
Attention of all the Divisions is also invited to the fact that the Establishment 
Division administer the Civil Service of Pakistan, the Police Service of Pakistan, the 
G.A.R. (General Wing), the Economic Pool@, and the Section Officers‘ cadre.  Therefore, 
cases relating to the deputation to other offices of the officers of these categories should not 
be made by the Division in which they are for the time being posted, but should be referred 
to the Establishment Division for disposal. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 1/26/61-C.III, dated 20-2-1963]. 
 
                                                          
* BPS 
 Now Pakistan Administrative Service. 
 Means General Administrative Reserve. Not relevant now. 
@ Not relevant now. There is an Economists and Planners Group as distinct from the Economic Pool. For 
Economic Pool, see O&M Establishment Manual Vol. I, O&M Wing, Estt. Division 1968, Chapter X, pages 
445-457. 

  Page - 552                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
 
7.11 
Applications of Section Officers 
 
The instructions contained in paragraph 5 of the Establishment Division Office 
Memorandum No. 1/8/52-C.III, dated the 7th August, 1963 are not generally observed by 
various Ministries/Divisions while forwarding to Establishment Division the applications of 
Section Officers for appointment elsewhere. 
 
2.  
It is reiterated that while forwarding the applications in question to the 
Establishment Division, information on the following points should also be invariably 
furnished to this Division:- 
 
(1)  Pay Scale attached to the post applied for 
 
(2)  Method of recruitment to the post in question 
 
(3)  Whether the post in question has been advertised 
 
(4)  Minimum educational qualifications and/or experience prescribed for the 
post concerned. 
 
(5)  A statement showing the educational qualifications, and/or experience of the 
candidate concerned indicating also whether he fulfills the requisite 
qualifications and/or experience. 
 
3.  
Such applications should be forwarded to the Establishment Division at least 
a fortnight before the last date prescribed for their receipt by the authorities concerned. 
[Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No. 1/8/62-C. III, dated 14-5-1966]. 
7.12 
Appropriate Authority for  
Forwarding of Applications  
Through Proper Channel 
 
The question has arisen as to what should be considered the appropriate authority 
for forwarding applications of the staff employed in a particular office. As only a responsible 
and fairly senior officer of a Division etc. is generally in a position to know the staff 
requirements of his Division, it has been decided, in consultation with the Federal Public 
Service Commission, that, in the case of a Ministry or a Division, the forwarding authority 
should be at least a Deputy Secretary and in the case of an Attached Department or a 
Subordinate Office, it should be the Head of the Department or Office, or an officer of rank 
equivalent to that of a Deputy Secretary designated by him. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.50/1/48-Ests.(ME), dated 3-6-1948]. 
7.13 
Avoidance of Delay in Forwarding  
Applications of Government  
Servants to the F.P.S.C 
 
Under the existing orders, all government servants, whether in Provincial or 
*Central Service, have to apply to the Federal Public Service Commission in connection with 
the examinations/selections held by them, through their respective Heads of Departments or 
Offices.  The last date for the receipt of applications by the Commission is set down in the 
                                                          
* Federal. 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 553 
 
 
notice relating to every examination conducted by them and in the advertisements issued in 
connection with selections to be held by them. 
 
2.  
The Federal Public Service Commission have pointed out that many such 
applications are received in their office long after the closing date, and have hitherto been 
entertained if the Commission were satisfied that candidates themselves were not at fault. 
The Commission are not prepared to continue this indulgence indefinitely and desire it to be 
made clear that in future late applications will not normally be accepted whatever the reason.  
It is, therefore, requested that care should be taken to see that applications of candidates who 
apply to the Federal Public Service Commission for the Central Superior and Ministerial 
Services examinations and selections are not delayed beyond the permitted date, since delay 
in future will not be condoned. 
 
3.  
To deprive a candidate of his candidature by reason of a negligent omission 
to forward his application could be a serious act of irresponsibility. 
[Authority.– Estt. Division letter No. 25/4/53-SE (I), dated 23-7-1953, to all Provincial   
Governments and Ministries of the  Federal Government]. 
7.14 
Competitive Examinations/Selections  
Held by FPSC – Applications of  
Departmental Candidates 
 
Reference.–Establishment Division‘s letter No.25/4/53-SEI, dated the 23rd July, 
1953. It has been reported by the F.P.S.C. that in several cases the applications from 
departmental candidates for the various competitive examinations/selections held by the 
F.P.S.C. are forwarded by the department concerned very late, without regard to the last date 
prescribed for receipt of applications announced by the Commission. To avoid that 
departmental delays, the Commission have decided that departmental delays in forwarding 
the applications of the departmental candidates will not normally be condoned.  They will be 
condoned only in exceptional circumstances, which will be considered by the Commission 
on the merit of each case. 
 
2.  
In view of what has been stated above, it will be very much appreciated if 
every possible effort is kindly made to ensure that applications from departmental candidates 
for appearing at the competitive examinations/selections held by the FPSC, are forwarded to 
the Commission by the due dates. In case of unavoidable delays reasons should please be 
recorded, otherwise applications received after the due dates will not be entertained by the 
Commission. 
[Authority.– Estt. Division‘s letter No. 8/4/60-E, XIV, dated 18-7-1960]. 
 
7.15 
Practice of Withholding/Forwarding  
of Applications of Departmental  
Candidates to FPSC 
 
The practice of withholding applications initially and forwarding them at a late 
stage should also be discontinued as no departmental permission which is granted 
subsequently will be acceptable to the Commission. 
[Authority:– Estt. Div.‘s (Training Wing) O.M. No.1/l/84-TR-IV dated 18-6-1985]. 

  Page - 554                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
VIII. (A) TRANSFER TO FOREIGN SERVICE  
IN PAKISTAN: DEPUTATION 
 
8.1 
Explanation of the Term ―deputation‖ 
 
Deputation in Pakistan.– C.S.R. 77: An officer is said to be on deputation when he 
is detached on special temporary duty for the performance of which there is no permanently 
or temporarily sanctioned appointment. 
 
According to the practice in vogue a government servant begins to be regarded as a 
―deputationist‖ when he is appointed or transferred, through the process of selection, to a 
post in a department or service altogether different from the one to which he permanently 
belongs, he continues to be placed in this category so long as he holds the new post in an 
officiating or a temporary capacity but cease to be regarded as such either on confirmation in 
the new post or on reversion to his substantive post. 
(Extract from PLD, 1981 S.C. 531-Islamic Republic of Pakistan versus Israr ul Haq and 23-others.) 
8.2 
Deputation of Government Servants –  
Period of Deputation 
 
 Maximum Period of Deputation.– In continuation of Establishment Division‘s 
circular D.O. letter No. 4/1/84-R.I (A) dated 20-11-1986 (Annex), conveying the directives 
of the Prime Minister requiring the period of appointment to be clearly specified in each case 
of contract, secondment or deputation, the following policy is laid down for deputation of 
government servants: 
 
  (i) The normal period of deputation for all categories of government servants 
would be three years. This would be extendable by two years with the prior 
approval of the competent authority. 
 
 (ii) All cases of initial deputation of government servants holding posts in BPS 
17 and above would be referred to the Establishment Division for approval of 
the competent authority. The initial deputation in the case of government 
servants holding posts in BPS 16 and below would be approved by the 
Secretary of the administrative Ministry concerned/ Head of the Department 
not below BPS 21. 
 
(iii) The competent authority to grant extension in deputation beyond the initial 
period of 3 years, would be as below:— 
(a)  
Government servants 
Head of the  
 
 in BPS 1 and 2.  
Department.  
(b)  
Government servants 
Secretary of the Admn. 
  
in BPS 3 to 16.  
Ministry/Head of the Department  
 
not below BPS 21. 
(c)  
Government servants 
Secretary of the Admn. 
  
in BPS 17 to 19.  
Ministry concerned. 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 555 
 
 
(d)  
Cases of government servants in BPS 20 and above would be referred 
to the Establishment Division. 
  
(iv)  On completion of the maximum period of five years, both the borrowing and 
the lending organizations should ensure immediate repatriation of the 
deputationist. 
    
 (v)  In case it is not possible to repatriate a person to his parent organisation for 
compelling reasons, the case should be referred to the Establishment Division 
before the expiry of the maximum period of 5 years, fully explaining the 
circumstances due to which immediate repatriation is not possible and 
measures taken to obtain or groom a replacement as early as possible. 
 
2.  
The above policy would also be applicable to transfer on foreign service in 
terms of FR 9(7) and rules contained in Chapter XII of the Fundamental Rules. 
 
3.  
Ministries/Divisions are requested to bring these instructions to the notice of 
their Attached Departments/ Subordinate Offices/Corporations and Autonomous Bodies etc. 
 
4.  
The existing instructions on this subject issued vide Estt.  Division‘s O.M. 
No. 1/28/75-D. II (CV), dated 4-11-1980 and O.M. No. 22/47/82-R-3, dated 12-4-1983 stand 
modified to the above extent. 
[Authority.– Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 1/28/ 75-D.II/R. 3/R.I. dated 18-2-1987]. 
(ANNEX) 
 
[Copy of Estt. Division Additional Secretary‘s D.O. letter No. 4/1/84-RI (A) 
dated 20-11-1986] 
 
Re-employment/Appointment on Contract, Secondment or Deputation.– It has 
come to the notice of the Prime Minister that officers, appointed on contract or serving on 
re-employment, secondment or on deputation in the Federal Government, are allowed to 
continue in their posts after the expiry of their tenure without specific orders of the 
competent authority for its extension. The Prime Minister has taken a serious view of this 
situation and has directed that:- 
 
(a) 
In all cases of appointment on contract, re-employment, secondment or 
deputation, the period of appointment should be clearly specified. 
 
(b) 
On the last date of the specified period, the officer should automatically 
stand relieved of his duties unless the orders of the competent authority 
have been obtained in advance extending the period. 
 
2.  
Immediate action may be taken to specify the period of appointment in 
those cases where it has not been specified. It may be ensured that in future no officer is 
appointed on contract, re-employment, secondment or on deputation without specifying 
the period of appointment. On the expiry of the specified period, the officer should be 
relieved of his assignment forthwith, unless the period has already been extended by the 
competent authority. 
 
3.  
In order to ensure compliance of the above directive of the Prime Minister, 
all Ministries/Divisions are requested to identify the cases in which officers are 

  Page - 556                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
continuing to work in their posts after the expiry of the specified period of contract/ 
re-employment/ secondment/deputation and intimate these to the Establishment Division 
immediately with recommendations for extension of the tenure where required.  Action 
may also be taken to terminate the appointments where extension is not required. 
 
4.  
All Ministries/Divisions etc. are also advised to initiate cases for extension 
in the period of contract/re-employment/secondment/deputation in future at least six 
months in advance of the date of expiry of the period of such appointment. 
 
5.  
The provision in para 28 of Establishment Division‘s O.M. No. 14/5/ 
78-D.III, dated 10-2-1980 dealing with induction/re-employment of the officers of armed 
forces in civil and such other instructions issued from time to time also stand modified in 
accordance with the Prime Minister‘s orders contained in para 1 of this letter. 
 
6.  
The above instructions may also be brought to the notice of all 
Corporations and Autonomous/Semi-Autonomous Bodies under the administrative 
control of Ministries/ Divisions as these would apply to them as well. 
8.3 
Delegation of Powers in Regard to 
Deputation of Government Servants  
 
In order to ensure expeditious processing of cases of deputation, the Chief 
Executive has been pleased to delegate to Secretaries of administrative Ministries/ 
Divisions and Heads of Attached Departments and Subordinate Offices not below BPS 
21, powers to approve initial deputation of officers upto BPS 19 belonging to cadres and 
posts under their administrative control for a period of three years. The above powers are 
subject to observance of the following guidelines:- 
(i) 
Where a post proposed to be filled is reserved under the rules for 
departmental promotion, appointment on deputation may be made only if 
the department certifies that no eligible person is available for promotion 
or the eligible person is found unfit for promotion by the appropriate 
DPC/Selection Board. In such cases, deputation may be approved till such 
time a suitable person becomes available for promotion.  
(ii) 
In case of posts reserved for initial recruitment, appointment on deputation 
may be made only as temporary arrangement, pending joining of the 
nominee of the FPSC, and subject to the condition that such appointment 
shall be made only after a requisition has been placed with the FPSC. 
(iii) In cases where a post is tenable through appointment by deputation, the 
normal period of deputation should be three years and no extension 
beyond three years may be allowed without prior approval of the 
Establishment Division. 
(iv) No officer should be sent on deputation unless he has completed three 
years‘ service in his parent department after return from an earlier 
deputation. 
                                                          
 Now Prime Minister. 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 557 
 
 
 
2. 
The provision of para 1(ii) of Establishment Division O.M. No.1/28/75-
D.II/R.3/R.I, dated 18-02-1987 shall stand amended accordingly. 
 
3. 
Ministries/Divisions are requested to bring these instructions to the notice 
of their Attached Departments/Subordinate Offices. 
[Authority:– Estt. Div.‘s OM No. 1/28/75-D.II/R.3/R.I, dated 11th April, 2000] 
 
8.4 
Deputation of Government Servants 
Reference Establishment Division‘s O.M. No. 1/28/75-D.II/R-3/R.I, dated 18 
February, 1987 as amended vide O.M. of same No. dated 11th April, 2000 on the above 
subject. The term ―deputation‖ as defined by the Supreme Court of Pakistan vide PLD 
1981 SC 531 means that a government servant begins to be regarded as a ―deputationist‖ 
when he is appointed or transferred, through the process of selection, to a post in a 
department or service altogether different from the one to which he permanently belongs, 
he continues to be placed in this category so long as he holds the new post in an 
officiating or a temporary, capacity, but ceases to be regarded as such either on 
confirmation in the new post or on reversion to his substantive post. 
2. 
According to the judgement of Federal Services Tribunal in Appeals No. 
39 and 40 (R)(CS)/2003 (M/s Liaqat Ali Chaudhry and others Vs Federation of Pakistan), 
up-held by the Supreme Court of Pakistan, as interpreted by the Law, Justice and Human 
Rights Division, all the incumbents who are deputed to work in an agency foreign to the 
service to which they belong, are entitled to draw Deputation Allowance.  
 
3. 
In view of the position stated above, the Finance Division have issued 
orders/instructions vide their O.M. No. F.5 (8) R-2/2007, dated the 4th July, 2007 stating 
that deputation allowance may be granted to all officers/officials of Ministries/ 
Divisions/Departments who have been transferred and posted on deputation basis or 
under Section 10 of Civil Servants Act, 1973, to a post in a department or service 
altogether different from the one to which they permanently belong. 
 
4. 
In view of the above, Ministries/Divisions are advised that hence-forth the 
Notifications/Orders issued by them regarding the deputation of their officers/officials to 
a department/office altogether different from the one to which they actually belong, must 
invariably state that: 
 
(i) 
The incumbent will be entitled to deputation allowance. 
 
(ii) 
The period of deputation shall be three years extendable by two years, 
with the approval of the competent authority. 
[Authority:– Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No. 1/18/2007-R-1, dated 10th December, 2007]. 
 
 
8.5 
Deputation Period – Absorption  
of Deputationists 
 
In continuation of Establishment Division‘s O.M. of even number, dated 
15.10.1979 (Annex), it is stated that:- 

  Page - 558                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
 
(1) 
The normal deputation period, for all categories/ grades of government 
servants, shall be three years, extendable for another two years with prior 
permission of the Establishment Division. A government servant shall not, 
however, remain on deputation to another government organization or an 
autonomous body/corporation etc. for more than five years. 
 
(2) 
If a person is on deputation to a government organization, and has 
completed the maximum tenure of five years, he must revert or be reverted 
by the borrowing office to his parent/lending organization of the expiry of 
that period; otherwise, the Audit Offices concerned shall not make 
payment of salary and allowances to him beyond the date of expiry of five 
years, unless specifically authorized by the Establishment Division. 
 
(3) 
If a person is on deputation to an autonomous organization/ corporation 
etc, and has completed the maximum tenure of five years, it will be 
obligatory for that person to report back to his parent/lending organization 
on the expiry of that period, irrespective of his being relieved by the 
borrowing corporation/body etc. Failure to report back, unless specifically 
authorized otherwise by the Establishment Division, will be construed as 
‗Misconduct‘ and make him liable to disciplinary action under the 
government servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 1973. 
 
(4) 
In case a deputationist is proposed to be absorbed permanently in the 
borrowing office (either a government organization or a corporation etc), 
such a proposal shall be initiated by the borrowing office at least six 
months before the expiry of the deputation period of the deputationist 
concerned. Such a proposal, with the written consent or request of the 
deputationist, shall be made by the borrowing office to the lending office 
(or parent office of the deputationist) which shall convey its decision (if 
necessary, in consultation with the Establishment Division) to the 
borrowing office as well as the deputationist, by the expiry of the term of 
his deputation. In the event of non-acceptance of the proposal, the 
individual shall revert back to his parent office as indicated at (2) and (3) 
above. 
 
2.  
Ministries/Divisions are requested to bring these instructions to the notice 
of 
the 
officers/staff 
of 
their 
Secretariat/Attached 
Departments/Subordinate 
Offices/Corporations etc. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No.1/28/75-D.II(CV), dated 4-11-1980]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 559 
 
 
(ANNEX) 
[Copy of the Establishment Division‘s O.M.No.1/28/75-D-II (CV) dated 15-10-1979] 
 
In spite of instructions issued on the subject, cases have come to the notice of 
the Establishment Division where government servants whose services were placed on 
deputation with other departments/organizations for a specified period have not been 
returned to the lending departments after the expiry of their tenure of deputation. What 
happens is that either a deputationist does not want to come back to his parent department 
or the borrowing department does not allow him to revert to his parent department on 
expiry of his term of deputation. This practice is against the interest of efficient 
administration.  
 
2.  
It has now been decided that in no case a government servant should 
remain on deputation to another department or autonomous body for more than five 
years. If a government servant has completed his maximum period of deputation, and the 
department still feels the need of his services, the borrowing department/organization 
should write to the lending department to replace him by another government servant of 
the same grade and qualification, failing which the borrowing organization would make 
their own arrangements. If a person is not willing to come back to his department on 
expiry of the period of his deputation and tenders his resignation, that may normally be 
accepted. 
 
3.  
All Ministries, Divisions and Departments are requested to review the 
cases of deputationists and take necessary action in the light of the above instructions. 
 
4.  
This supersedes all previous instructions on the subject. 
8.6 
Deputation of Government Servants –  
Normal Period of Deputation and   
Extension 
 
Reference Establishment Division‘s OM No. 4/1/84-R-I(A), dated 20-11-1986 
addressed to all Federal Secretaries/Provincial Chief Secretaries, wherein the following 
directive of the Prime Minister was communicated: 
(a) 
In all cases of appointment on contract, re-employment, secondment or 
deputation the period of appointment should be clearly specified. 
(b) 
On the last date of the specified period the officer should automatically 
stand relieved of his duties unless the orders of the competent authority 
have been obtained in advance for extending the period. 
 
2.  
The Ministries/Divisions were accordingly directed to specify the period 
of appointment in those cases where it was not specified and to ensure that no officer was 
appointed on contract, re-employment, secondment or on deputation without specifying 
the period of appointment. It was also directed that on expiry of the specified period, the 
officer should be relieved of his assignment forthwith unless the period has already been 
extended by the competent authority. 
 
3.  
The standard terms and conditions of deputation which were drawn in 
consultation with Finance Division and circulated vide Establishment Division‘s O.M 
No. 1/13/87-R.I, dated 03-12-1990, provide that ―the normal period of deputation for all 

  Page - 560                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
categories of government servants will be three years. This will be extendable maximum 
by two years with the prior approval of the competent authority‖ i.e. Establishment 
Division. 
 
4. 
The policy guidelines issued with the approval of the Chief Executive and 
circulated vide Establishment Division‘s O.M No.1/28/75-II/R-3/R.I, dated 11-4-2000  
also provided that ―the normal period of deputation should be three years and no 
extension beyond three years may be allowed without prior approval of Establishment 
Division.‖ 
 
5.  
Despite the above cited instructions, it has been noticed with concern that 
in some cases neither the period of deputation is specified by the Ministries/Divisions 
concerned nor the incumbents are relieved of their duties on the expiry of specified 
period of deputation, and thus they continue to serve in the borrowing department without 
the prior approval of the competent authority resulting into administrative problems and 
legal issues due to non-adherence to the instructions of the government. 
 
6.  
The Ministries/Divisions are once again advised to strictly observe the 
directions of the Prime Minister as referred to in paras 1 and 2 above and instructions 
issued by Establishment Division as referred to in paras 3 and 4 above. 
 
7. 
The above instructions may also be brought to the notice of all 
corporations and Autonomous/Semi-Autonomous Bodies under the administrative 
control of Ministries/ Divisions. 
[Authority:- Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No. 1/28/75/-D.II/R.3/R.I, dated 04-03-2005]. 
 
8.7 
Terms and Conditions of  
Deputation of Civil Servants  
 
Reference the instructions contained in Estab. Div‘s O.M No. 1/28/75/ D.II/R.3/ 
R.I, dated 5.7.1995, on the above subject. The aforesaid instructions have been reviewed 
and it has been decided with the approval of the Prime Minister that civil servants who 
are on probation on promotion to a higher post may be allowed to proceed on deputation. 
However, this concession will not be admissible to those civil servants, who are on 
probation on initial appointment and have to pass/qualify a prescribed examination, test 
or course/training for the successful completion of their probation. 
 
2. 
Ministries/Divisions are to bring above instructions to the notice of 
Attached Departments/Subordinate Offices under their administrative Control. 
[Authority:- Estt. Div.‘s OM No. 1/28/75/D.II/R.3/R.I, dated 14.02.2007] 
 
8.8 
Deputation Not a Method of Appointment 
 
Reference Establishment Division‘s O.M.No.1/28/75-D.2/R.3/R.I, dated 18th 
February, 1987, wherein the normal period of deputation for all categories of government 
servants had been fixed as three years, extendable by another two years with the prior 
approval of the competent authority. Under the said instructions, Secretaries of the 
Ministries/Divisions concerned were authorized to grant extension in deputation period 
                                                          
 Now Prime Minister. 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 561 
 
 
beyond the initial period of three years in respect of government servants holding posts in 
BPS-17 to BPS-19. 
 
2.  
It has been observed, however, that there is a growing tendency to resort 
to postings through deputationists despite the fact that deputation is not a normal 
prescribed method of appointment as, under the Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion 
and Transfer) Rules, 1973, three methods of appointments are required to be made either 
by promotion or by initial appointment or by transfer. The method of appointment to 
posts is also prescribed in the recruitment rules. Filling up the posts through deputation, if 
not provided so in the recruitment rules, leads to following adverse implications:- 
(i) 
In case of promotion posts, the promotions of departmental personnel are 
delayed/stopped. 
(ii) 
In case the post is required to be filled through initial appointment, quota 
of a particular province is affected. 
 
3.  
In order to bring the deputation policy in conformity with the present 
policy of postings and transfers circulated vide Establishment Division‘s O.M. 
No.10/10/94-R.2, dated 22nd March, 1994, and also to discourage the increasing tendency 
of postings through deputation, it has been decided that, in future, the deputation period 
will be limited to three years only. A maximum two years extension in the deputation 
period will be considered only in exceptional cases, in the public interest, and with the 
prior approval of the Establishment Division in all cases of government servants in BPS-
17 and above. The extension cases shall be forwarded to the Establishment Division at 
least six months before the expiry of the three-year deputation period and with proper 
justification for the proposal. However, no deputation proposals will be entertained which 
will adversely affect the method of appointment to the post as laid down in the 
recruitment rules. Accordingly, all such proposals must invariably be accompanied by a 
formal assurance signed by at least the Joint Secretary (Admn) to that effect. 
 
4.  
Ministries/Divisions are requested to also bring these instructions to the 
notice of their Attached Departments, Subordinate Offices, Corporations, Autonomous 
Bodies, etc, under their administrative control, for guidance/strict compliance. It may 
please be noted that arrangements have been made in consultation with the Auditor 
General‘s Office whereby payment of emoluments etc. to those on deputation will be 
stopped forthwith, immediately following the completion of the three-year deputation 
period, unless the Establishment Division‘s prior approval has been obtained and 
conveyed to the concerned Audit Circle. 
 
5.  
The existing instructions on this subject issued vide Establishment 
Division‘s O.M.No.1/28/75-D.2/R.3/R.I, dated 18th February, 1987 stand modified to the 
above extent.  
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No.1/28/75-R.I, dated 14-3-1995]. 
 
8.9 
Deputation of Government Servants –  
Procedure for Extension  
 
Reference Establishment Division O.M. No. 1/28/75-D.II/R.3/R.I, dated 
6.10.1994 read with OM dated 14.3.1995 on the above subject. According to the standing 
instructions contained in this Division OM dated 6.10.1994 cases for extension in 

  Page - 562                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
deputation period are required to be forwarded to the Establishment Division at least six 
months before the expiry of initial period of deputation failing which no extension in 
deputation period would be granted and the officers concerned would be considered 
repatriated to their parent department/ organization on expiry of initial period of 
deputation. 
 
2.  It has, however, been observed that, at times, the Ministries/Divisions send 
cases to this Division for extension in deputation period long after the expiry of initial 
deputation period. This practice is decidedly against policy instructions on the subject 
and need to be avoided. 
 
3. 
Ministries/Divisions are, therefore, requested to comply with the standing 
instructions, referred to above, strictly and to ensure that cases for extension in deputation 
period are forwarded to Establishment Division six months before the expiry of initial 
period of deputation with proper justification. 
[Authority:- Estab. Div. OM No. 1/28/75-R.I, dated 30th October, 2000] 
 
8.10 
Terms and Conditions of Deputation  
of Civil Servants [] 
 
The instructions governing the terms and conditions of transfer of civil servants 
[to foreign service in Pakistan] are contained in FR.114 and various O.Ms. issued by the 
Finance Division/Establishment Division from time to time. Since these instructions are 
scattered over a number of O.Ms. enquiries have been received from Ministries/Divisions 
regarding applicability of these instructions in their correct perspective. Accordingly, 
standard terms and conditions of deputation of civil servants *[] have been drawn in 
consultation with the Finance Division and are given below:— 
1. 
Period of Deputation 
 
The normal period of deputation for all categories of government servants will 
be three years. This will be extendable maximum by two years with the prior 
approval of the competent authority. 
2. 
Pay 
 
Pay in BPS as admissible under the government from time to time. 
3. 
Deputation Allowance 
 
Deputation allowance will be admissible at 20% of the basic pay subject to a 
maximum of Rs. 6000 per month (both for Management Grade and non-
Management Grade posts).  
4. 
Travelling Allowance 
 
Travelling allowance will be admissible in accordance with the ordinary TA 
rules of the government except that where TA rules of the borrowing 
organization are more favourable the latter will apply. 
                                                          
The words ‗to foreign service in Pakistan‘ deleted vide Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No. 1/13/87-R.I, dated  04-04-2007. 
The words ‗ to foreign service in Pakistan‘ substituted with the words ‗on deputation‘ vide Estt. Div.‘s O.M. 
No. 1/13/87-R.I, dated 04-04-2007. 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 563 
 
 
5. 
Conveyance 
 
(i) 
In case official car has been provided  to  the  deputationist  by  the  
borrowing  organization,  it should be used for official purpose only, 
except where employees of the borrowing organization in an equivalent 
rank are entitled to free use of official car for both official and private 
purpose the same facility would be admissible to the deputationist subject 
to the prescribed petrol limit. 
 
(ii) 
If the deputationist is entitled to official car in his capacity as a 
government servant, excluding the official transport provided on a specific 
post, he shall continue to enjoy the facility on the same terms. 
      
(iii) If the deputationist is the chief executive of the autonomous/semi 
autonomous body, he will be permitted free use of official car, for official 
and private purpose subject to the condition that the total petrol 
consumption will not exceed 180 liters in a month, in case the 
deputationist is in [BPS-20 or] BPS-21 and 240 liters in case he is in 
BPS-22.  
 
(iv) If official transport is provided both for official and private purpose, the 
residence-office conveyance allowance shall not be permissible. 
 
(v) 
In case official transport is not provided, or if provided, is not used for 
journey between office and residence, residence-office conveyance 
allowance will be admissible at specified stations, at the rates and on the 
conditions laid down in para-8 of the Finance Division‘s O.M. No. F.1(1) 
IMP.11/77, dated 28.4.1977, as amended from time to time. For 
occasional travel, the mileage/conveyance rates, admissible in the 
government will be applicable. 
6. 
Residential Facility 
 
 (i) 
Accommodation may be provided to the deputationist, of a standard not 
inferior to what is normally admissible to him as a government servant, 
subject to deduction of 5% of his emoluments. If accommodation is not 
provided, the deputationist will receive house rent allowance, at a rate 
fixed by the government from time to time. If the deputationist is the chief 
executive of the autonomous/semi autonomous body, free unfurnished 
accommodation may be provided except where an official residence has 
already been constructed by the autonomous/semi-autonomous body. 
 
(ii) 
The facility of hiring of a house owned by a civil servant will be 
admissible to a civil servant appointed on deputation in an autonomous 
body as provided under rule 22 of Pakistan Allocation Rules, 1971. 
 
iii) 
In case accommodation is to be hired for the deputationist, the rental 
ceiling laid down by the Works Division in the Pakistan Allocation Rules, 
1971**, as amended from time to time, or that applicable to employees of 
                                                          
 Amended vide Estab. Div.‘s O.M. No. 1/13/87-R.I, dated 15-12-1991. 
Pakistan Allocation Rules, 1971 were repealed by Pakistan Allocation Rules, 1993 vide Works Division‘s 
 Notification No. SRO 1006(1)/93, dated 20-10-1993 (pages 19-40, Common Services Manual (Vol. II), 
PPARC,  M.S. Wing, Estt. Div. 2003). Pakistan Allocation Rules, 1993 were repealed by the Accommodation 
Allocation  Rules, 2002 vide Works Division‘s Notification No. SRO 749(I)/2002, dated 30-10-2002 (pages 41-
69, of the  document ibid). 

  Page - 564                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
equivalent rank in the borrowing organization, whichever is beneficial to 
the deputationist, will be applicable. 
7. 
Medical Facility 
 
Medical facilities may be allowed, in accordance with the relevant rules of the 
borrowing organization provided that these facilities will not be inferior to those 
admissible under the government. 
8. 
Pension Contribution  
 
[When a civil servant is posted on deputation basis to autonomous/ semi-
autonomous bodies/corporations etc. pension contribution shall invariably be 
made by the borrowing organization at the prescribed rate]. 
9. 
Leave Salary 
 
No leave salary contribution shall be payable by the borrowing organization, but 
leave/leave salary shall be sanctioned/paid during the period of deputation, by 
the borrowing organization. The Federal Government employees sent on 
deputation who are granted leave and paid leave salary by the borrowing 
organization shall not count the period spent on deputation for earning leave 
under the Government of Pakistan on their return. However, the leave earned by 
a civil servant, but not availed/allowed during the period of his deputation in 
Pakistan will be credited to his leave account on reversion to government 
department. For this purpose, the autonomous bodies and corporations will 
maintain proper leave accounts for the government servant on deputation with 
them. Encashment of leave will not be admissible in the case of Government 
servants on deputation on the basis of the Rules/ Regulations of the autonomous 
bodies/corporations. 
10. 
Disability Leave 
 
The borrowing organization shall also be liable for leave salary, in respect of 
disability leave granted to the civil servant, on account of disability occurred in 
and through foreign service, even though if such disability manifests itself 
after the termination of foreign service. The leave salary charges, for such leave, 
shall be recovered by the civil servant direct from the borrowing organization. 
11. 
G.P. Fund etc. 
 
During the period of deputation, the civil servant concerned will continue to 
subscribe to the G.P. Fund, the remittance of which shall be supported with a 
G.P. Fund schedule, mentioning therein the G.P. Fund Account Number and the 
name of the Accounts Officer, maintaining the account. The remittance should 
be made to the parent office of the government servant concerned. The parent 
office will send copies of challans and schedules, to the Accounts Officer 
concerned for necessary action. As regards the Benevolent Fund and Group 
Insurance premium contribution, this should be remitted directly, by the 
government servant concerned, through the normal banking channel, to the 
                                                          
 Substituted vide Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No. 1/13/87-R.I, dated 04-04-2007. 
 deputation 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 565 
 
 
Board of Trustees, Federal Employees Benevolent and Group Insurance Funds, 
Islamabad with the prescribed schedule, duly completed. 
12. 
Change in Terms of Deputation 
 
The civil servant on deputation will continue to be under the rule-making control 
of the lending government, in matters of pay, leave, pension, G.P. Fund, etc. The 
lending government accordingly, will have a right to determine, in consultation 
with the borrowing organization, the terms of his employment under the latter 
and these terms shall not be varied by the borrowing organization, without 
consulting the lending government. 
13. 
Joining Time, Pay and TA 
 
The borrowing organization will pay for the joining time granted on transfer to 
and reversion from deputation, at the rate prescribed by the Federal 
Government. It will also pay TA to the deputationist for journeys performed by 
himself on transfer to and reversion from foreign service. 
14. 
Encashment of LPR 
 
A civil servant on deputation who is due to retire from government service 
either on completion of 30 years qualifying service or on attaining the age of 
superannuation, may draw the encashment of LPR from the borrowing 
organization, if he continues to work during the whole period of his LPR/last 
year of his service, without repatriation of his services. 
15. 
Compensatory Allowance 
 
[If, by reason of his transfer to foreign service, the government servant loses 
any privilege or concession of pecuniary value which he would have enjoyed in 
government service or is constrained to incur extra expenditure due to the nature 
of his duties in  foreign service or to the circumstances in which those duties are 
performed, he may be allowed a compensatory allowance or other suitable 
concession with the prior  concurrence of the competent authority. This will 
include Personal Allowance admissible w.e.f. 1st June, 1994 vide para 5(i) of 
Finance Division‘s O.M.No. F.1(2)-Imp/94(i) dated 15th June, 1994. Such 
personal allowance in case of BPS-17 to BPS-22 employees shall be reduced 
equal to annual increments and shall cease as his pay is increased equal to or 
more than his personal allowance].  
16. 
Qualification Pay/Allowance 
 
The deputationist would also be entitled to draw qualification pay/allowances 
which he has been drawing in his parent department. The qualification 
pay/allowance will not be related to the job but will be personal to the 
incumbent for possessing certain qualifications or passing an examination. 
 
2.  
The above instruction shall come into force from the date of issue of this 
O.M. and shall replace the existing orders/ instructions on the subject. 
[Authority:-Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.1/13/87-R.I, dated 3-12-1990]. 
                                                          
 Substituted vide Establishment Division‘s O.M. No. 1/13/87-R-I, dated 12-2-1995 
 ‗deputation‘. 

  Page - 566                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
8.11 
Terms and Conditions of Deputation  
of Civil Servants to Foreign Service  
in Pakistan 
 
Reference this Division‘s Office Memorandum of even number dated 3.12.1990, 
as amended from time to time Item No. 3 (Deputation Allowance) of the aforesaid O.M 
be substituted as under [w.e.f. 1.7.2005]:- 
 ―@ 20% of the basic pay subject to a maximum of Rs. 6000/-- per 
month (both for Management Grade and non-Management Grade 
posts)‖ 
 
2.  
This issues with the concurrence of Finance Division as contained in their 
OM No. 3(3)/R.3/2006-360, dated 27.5.2006. 
[Authority:- Estab. Div. OM No. F. No. 1/13/87- R.I, dated 12th June, 2006] 
 
8.12 
Instructions to Regulate Cases of  
Transfers/Deputation of Staff from  
One Office to Another 
 
The following instructions are issued to regulate cases of transfers from one 
office to another of the ministerial staff employed in the Pakistan Federal Secretariat and 
its Attached Departments with particular reference to the position of a deputationist in his 
parent office as well as in the borrowing office. 
 
2.  
Should temporary transfers to other offices be allowed (i) as a normal 
course, or (ii) only if considered necessary in the public interest.– Transfers should be 
allowed only in the public interest.  The term ―public interest‖ is explained in paragraph 4 
below. 
 
3.  
Should a transfer be allowed (i) normally in the same grade*, or (ii) only if 
it involves promotion.– It does not appear necessary to lay down any hard and fast rules 
in this respect, since as stated in paragraph 2 above, transfers will be allowed only, if 
necessary, in the public interest, and it would, therefore, be immaterial whether a transfer 
is in the same grade or whether it involves promotion. 
 
4.  
What should be done to ensure that the claims to promotion of those 
already employed in the borrowing office have been satisfied.– (a) It has been decided 
that, in fairness to the persons employed in the office in which a vacancy occurs, a person 
from another office should be appointed only if no person eligible and suitable for 
appointment is available in the office concerned.  For this purpose, it should be placed on 
record by the appointing authority, or the Departmental Promotion Committee concerned, 
as the case may be, that none of the persons eligible concerned, for appointment from 
                                                          
 The words ―with immediate effect‖ substituted with the words/figures ―w.e.f. 1.7.2005‖ vide   Estt. Div.‘s 
O.M.No.1/13/87 dated 09-12-2006. 
 BPS/post. 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 567 
 
 
amongst the persons is available in the office. The reasons for declaring the persons 
employed in the office concerned as unfit for appointment to the post in question should 
be recorded by the authority concerned. When a person is appointed by transfer in the 
circumstances stated above, his transfer should be considered to have been made in the 
public interest. (b) When a transfer becomes necessary in the manner referred to above, it 
should be arranged between the offices concerned without a reference to any outside 
authority. It may be pointed out that a transfer should be made only if it is permissible 
under the relevant rules relating to recruitment to the post or service concerned. In this 
connection attention is also invited to the Establishment Division Office Memorandum 
No. 54/2/48-Estt. (ME), dated the 21st November, 1949. 
 
5.  
The position in his parent office of the person transferred temporarily to 
another office.– When a transfer has been made in the public interest as explained in 
paragraph 4 above, the interests of the person concerned should be protected in his parent 
office until he is confirmed in the borrowing office. For this purpose, when a vacancy 
occurs in a higher grade*in his parent office, the person concerned should be considered 
therefor, and if he is selected for promotion in accordance with the relevant rules, he 
should be appointed formally (and not actually) to the post in the higher grade*.  
Similarly, if he was officiating, at the time of his transfer, in post a higher than the one in 
which he was employed permanently, he should be considered for confirmation in the 
higher post when his turn comes.  This would enable him to occupy, on reversion to his 
parent office, the position which he would have occupied had ―next rule― should 
                                                          
 Note:  
Next Below Rule: In initial substantive appointment of a government servant, his pay is fixed, if he holds a lien, 
on a permanent post in this manner: if the appointment involves assumption of duties and responsibilities of 
greater importance than those of the permanent post, he will draw as initial pay the stage of time scale next 
above substantive pay in respect of the old post. When appointment to the new post does not involve such 
assumption, he will draw, as initial pay at the stage of the time scale equal to his substantive pay in respect of 
the old post, or if there is no such stage, the stage next below that pay plus personal pay equal to the difference, 
till he earns an increment in the time scale of the old post or in the time scale of the new post, whichever is less, 
but if the minimum in the time scale of the new post is higher than his substantive pay, he will draw that 
minimum as initial pay. The guiding principle for the working of the next below rule, as given in FR 30(10) is 
that an officer outside his regular line should not suffer by forfeiting acting promotion had he remained in his 
regular line. Thus a fortuitous acting promotion of a junior officer to an officer outside the line of promotion, 
does not give rise to claim under the next below rule. 
 
Procedure for regulating pay under the ‗next below rule‘: The Governor General has sanctioned the 
adoption of the following guiding principle in regard to the working in future of the ‗next below‘ rule. The 
intention of the so-called rule was apparently that an officer out of his regular line should not suffer by 
forfeiting acting promotion which he would otherwise have received had he remained in his regular line. From 
that it follows that the fortuitous acting promotion of someone junior to an officer who is out of the regular line 
does not, in itself, give rise to a claim under the 'next below' rule. Before such a claim is established it should be 
necessary that all the officers senior to the officer who is out of the regular line have been given acting 
promotion, and also the officer next below him, unless in any case the acting promotion is not given because of 
inefficiency, unsuitability or leave. In the event of one of these three bars being applicable to the officer 
immediately below the officer outside his regular line, some other officer, even more junior should have 
received acting promotion and the officers, if any, in between should have been passed over for one of these 
reasons. 
 
 
 

  Page - 568                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
however, be allowed to him in respect of a promotion nor should he be placed in an 
advantageous position vis-a-vis his colleagues in his parent office, by virtue of his 
promotion, if any, in the borrowing office.  In other words, he should be considered, 
while on temporary deputation to the other office, as a member of his parent office for the 
purpose of confirmation, promotion, seniority etc.  He should be allowed to revert to his 
parent office with the agreement of both the lending and the borrowing offices. 
 
6.  
Seniority on transfer from one office to another.– (i) The instructions in 
the foregoing paragraphs regulate the position of a deputationist in his parent office. As 
regards his seniority in the office to which he is transferred, it should be determined in 
the following manner:- 
(a) 
When it is open to the person concerned to accept or refuse an offer of 
appointment in another office, he should count his seniority in the new 
office from the date of his transfer to that office. 
(b) 
When a person is compulsorily transferred to another office as a result of 
conscription, or alongwith the post and his work, he should be allowed to 
count his previous continuous service in the grade towards seniority in that 
grade in the new office. 
 
It may be pointed out that separate seniority lists should be prepared in respect 
of (i) persons appointed on a permanent or a quasi-permanent basis; and (ii) persons 
appointed on a purely temporary basis, and the person obtained by transfer from another 
office should be assigned his appropriate place, in accordance with the above 
instructions, in the list of the persons to which category he belongs. 
 
(ii) The seniority of a person, who went on deputation from one office to another 
before 31st  March, 1951, should be determined in his new office, in accordance with the 
following instructions:- 
(a) 
In order to get the benefit of continuous service in a *grade, a deputationist 
be permanent in that *grade in his parent office, and not merely eligible 
for being made permanent. In case, however, he is subsequently made 
permanent in a *grade in his parent office from a retrospective date, his 
                                                                                                                                                
(Late Govt. of India Finance Department Endst. No. F.27(1)-EX-I/36, dated the 20th February, 
1936 and Home Department No. F. 52/36, dated the 6th February, 1936). 
 
The Ministry of Finance has had under consideration the question of operation of the 'next below 
rule' in the offices of the Government of Pakistan. The "next below rule" was a temporary expedient designed to 
protect government servants from monetary loss and in effect meant the temporary upgrading of posts. It was 
originally intended that the expediency should not last more than six months in individual cases. Whatever may 
have been the held advantage in the past to leave a man undisturbed in the post by him if the exigencies of the 
public service required it, the need for such, considerations does not exist at present. It is the considered opinion 
of this Ministry that the concessions of the 'next below rule' should not be permitted except in very exceptional 
circumstances and that too for very short periods. It has been decided, therefore, that the cases wherein the 
benefit of the ‗next below rule‘ has been conceded should be reviewed forthwith. The Ministry of Interior/etc. 
should take steps either to obtain the approval of this Ministry for the continuance of that benefit or to revert the 
government servant concerned to his parent office.  
(Ministry of Finance O.M. No. 1196-R.E-.G./47, dated the 7th December, 1947) 
* BPS/post.  

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 569 
 
 
seniority should be changeable in the borrowing Ministry/ Department, 
and he should be considered to be permanent on the date of transfer, and 
given the benefit of his continuous service in the borrowing 
Ministry/Department in that *grade; 
 
(b) 
A deputationist can get the benefit of his continuous service in a *grade in 
the borrowing Ministry/ Department only if he is appointed in the 
borrowing Ministry against a regular post in accordance with the roster 
prescribed in the Establishment Division Office Memorandum No. 
54/2/48/Ests. (ME), dated the 21st November, 1949. If, however, he is 
appointed in the borrowing Ministry/Department against a temporary post, 
he will take seniority with effect from the date he is appointed against a 
regular post, and all persons in the borrowing Ministry who are permanent 
in that *grade, or have been appointed according to the prescribed roster 
on the date of the deputationists temporary appointment, will take 
seniority over him. 
 
7.  
Transfers as a result of conscription.– The interests of the person 
transferred compulsorily to another office as a result of conscription should be adequately 
protected in his parent office as stated in paragraph 5 above.  In addition, when his turn 
for promotion to a higher *grade comes in his parent office, he should be appointed to the 
post actually and be allowed the financial benefit of the ―next below rule‖. 
 
8.  
Transfers alongwith posts.– As regards persons who are transferred to 
another office alongwith their posts, the question of the protection of their interest in their 
parent office will not arise, since they will be transferred on a permanent basis and will 
thus sever their connections with the previous office. 
 
9.  
Protection of interests of temporary persons.– The above instructions 
apply to persons who hold permanent posts in their parent offices.  As regards persons 
employed on a temporary basis, there is no question of the protection of their interests in 
their previous office, since, on transfer to another office, they will automatically cease to 
be members of their previous office.  If, however, an occasion arises in which a 
temporary person is compulsorily transferred to another office as a result of conscription, 
the question regarding the protection of his interests in his original office should be 
decided in consultation with the Establishment Division. 
 
10.  Persons holding excluded posts.– Persons employed against ―excluded 
posts‖ in the Pakistan Federal Secretariat and its Attached Departments are not eligible 
for appointment to posts in the regular cadre, vide Establishment Division Office 
Memorandum No. 54/l/48/Est. (ME), dated the 24th August, 1948. If a case arises in 
which a person holding a permanent appointment in the regular cadre is appointed 
temporarily to a post in the ―excluded cadre‖, in view of his special or technical 
qualifications, his case should be considered as one of transfer to another office, and 
should be dealt with in the light of the instructions contained in the foregoing paragraphs. 
                                                          
* BPS/post.  
 Note w.r.t para 5 Sl.No.8.12. 

  Page - 570                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
 
11.  These instructions take effect from the date of this Office Memorandum. It 
is necessary that, before a transfer is made, the position of the person concerned, both in 
his parent office and the borrowing office, should be specially determined in the light of 
these instructions and the decision communicated in writing to the person concerned as 
well as to the office to which he is transferred. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 6/15/48-ME, dated 31-3-1951 read with  
O.M. No. 6/39/57-ME, dated 5-2-1958]. 
 
9.1 
Grant of Deputation Allowance 
 
The term ―deputation‖ has not been defined in the Civil Servants Act, 1973  and 
the rules made thereunder. However, in its judgement (PLD 1981 SC 531), the Supreme 
Court of Pakistan has enunciated the following explanation of the term deputation: 
―According to the practice in vogue a Government servant begins to be regarded 
as a ‗deputationist‘ when he is appointed or transferred, through the process of 
selection to a post in a department or service altogether different from the one to 
which he permanently belongs. He continues to be placed in this category so 
long as he holds the new post in an officiating or a temporary capacity but 
ceases to be regarded as such either on confirmation in the new post or on 
reversion to his substantive post.‖ 
 
2.  
On the basis of the above cited explanation, appointment of a civil servant 
of the Federal Government, other than an officer of the *APUG, to a post in the 
Provincial Government would fall within the definition of deputation. 
 
3.  
For the purpose of entitlement of deputation allowance, however, the 
above cited explanation of the term deputation is not relevant because deputation 
allowance sanctioned in Establishment Division O.M. No. 1/13/87-R.I, dated 3rd 
December, 1990 is admissible only on ―deputation of civil servants to foreign service in 
Pakistan‖. The term ―foreign service in Pakistan‖ has been defined in Rule 9(7) of the 
Fundamental and Supplementary Rules. According to these rules a government servant is 
considered to be on deputation to foreign service in Pakistan when he receives his pay 
from outside the general revenues of the Federation, or a Province or Railways fund. This 
means that deputation allowance is not admissible if a person is on deputation to a 
department of Federal or Provincial Government even outside the normal line of his 
service because he continues to receive his salary during such deputation from the 
general revenues of the Federation or a Province. Deputation allowance is thus 
admissible only in cases of `deputation to foreign service in Pakistan‘ as defined in 
FR.9(7) and it is not admissible in cases of deputation to Ministries/ Divisions, Attached 
Departments or Subordinate Offices of Federal Government or Provincial Government or 
Railways. 
                                                          
* All Pakistan Services (Change in Nomenclature) Rules, 1973, notified vide SRO 1307(I)/73 dated 14-09-
1973, have been repealed vide SRO 89(I)/2014 dated 14-02-2014, whereby all notifications and instructions 
issued on the subject from time to time were mutatis mutandis amended. 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 571 
 
 
 
4.  
It is requested that the Finance Division may kindly tender their advice on 
the point raised at para 2 above. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. Dy.875/98-DS(E.I), dated 2-4-1999]. 
 
9.2 
Clarification About Deputation Allowance 
 
Reference Establishment Division‘s O.M. No.Dy.875/98-DS(E.I), dated 
2.4.1999  on the subject noted above. In accordance with the existing policy instructions 
issued by the Establishment Division vide O.M. No.1/13/87-R.I, dated 03.12.1990, 
deputation allowance is strictly allowed to all government servants including Provincial 
Governments who are deputed under the standard terms of deputation in light of Circular 
quoted above. It is also confirmed that term ―a foreign service in Pakistan‖, has been 
covered in rule 9(7) of the Fundamental and Supplementary Rules. 
 
2.  
It is, therefore, clarified that a government servant is considered to be on 
deputation to foreign service in Pakistan when he receives his pay from outside the 
general revenues of the federation or a province or railway funds. Subsequently, 
deputation allowance would not be admissible to a person on deputation to a department 
of Federal or Provincial Government even outside the normal line of his service because 
he continues to receive his salary during such deputation from the general revenue of 
federation or a province. 
[Authority.- Finance Division‘s O.M. No. F.12(1) R.3/99-386, dated 13-5-1999]. 
9.3 
Bar Against the Use of the Term  
―Deputation Allowance‖  
 
It has been brought to notice that Ministries and Divisions frequently sanction 
―deputation allowance‖ for government servants without specifying the reason for the 
allowance. 
 
2.  
At the outset, it may be stated that the term ―deputation allowance‖ has not 
been used in the F.Rs and under those rules special duty or ―deputation within Pakistan‖ 
is not recognized vide Audit instruction below F.R. 40. Such cases are correctly described 
as cases of temporary transfer. The use of the term ―deputation allowance‖ to denote an 
addition to pay or an allowance granted to a government servant on his transfer from one 
department to another is technically incorrect and not recognized under the FRs. The 
position under these rules is that: 
(1) 
if on transfer from one department to another a government servant is 
appointed to a post for which pay and allowances have already been fixed 
he should, ordinarily, draw the pay and allowances attached to that post; 
(2) 
if he is transferred for temporary duty against a temporary post created for 
him, the pay of the post has to be fixed in accordance with the principles 
laid down in F.R. 40 and the government orders below that rule; 
(3) 
if it is not considered necessary to fix the pay of the post, the officer who 
is placed on temporary duty draws his own pay but if the duty involves the 
consideration mentioned in F.R. 9(25), a suitable special pay is sanctioned 
to him; 

  Page - 572                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
(4) 
if, however, the transfer does not attract the provisions of F.R. 9(25), but 
the grant of a compensatory allowance is justified e.g., where an officer 
has to incur extra expenditure due, for instance, to the expensiveness or 
remoteness of the locality to which he is transferred a suitable 
compensatory allowance is granted. 
 
The classification of the additional remuneration, in either of the last two cases 
would depend on the reasons for which it is sanctioned. 
 
3.  
The position stated above may be kept in view while sanctioning additions 
to emoluments on transfer of government servants. The terminology used in the sanctions 
should be strictly in accordance with the terms recognized under the FRs and the reasons 
for which additions to emoluments are sanctioned should invariably be specified in the 
sanction letter. 
[Authority.- Finance Division‘s O.M.No.F.3 (31)-R-II(I)/58, dated 15-8-1958]. 
 
10.1 
Right of Reversion to Temporary Government Servants  
 
When the right of reversion is given to a temporary person, his case becomes 
analogous to that of a regular deputationist to some other office.  Para 9 of the Office 
Memorandum, dated the 31st March, 1951 states the normal position in respect of 
temporary staff. If, however, the employing Ministry give the right of reversion to a 
temporary employee at their discretion, there is nothing wrong in it. The spirit behind the 
instructions contained in the Office Memorandum, dated the 31st March, 1951  was the 
protection of interests of deputationists to other offices while they are away. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s U.O. Note No. 6/17/58-ME, dated 4-8-1958]. 
10.2 
Reversion of Probationers Undergoing  
Training at the Civil Services Academy  
to Their Former Post  
 
It has been decided that a probationer who holds lien against his former post 
where he was appointed otherwise than through Competitive Examination held by the 
Federal Public Service Commission, will be allowed to revert to that former post within 
30 days of the commencement of common training programme at the Civil Services 
Academy. Such a probationer will not be allowed to revert in any case after the expiry of 
that period. 
 
2.  
It is requested that the above decision may appropriately be incorporated 
in the offer of appointment in future. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No.1/17/87-T.V. dated 19-2-1987]. 
 
10.3 
Reversion of Deputationists 
 
Cases have come to the notice of the Establishment Division where officers 
whose services were obtained on deputation for a specific period were not returned by the 
borrowing department when the parent department asked for their reversion. Attention in 
this regard is invited to the Establishment Division‘s O.M. No. 1(28)/71-D. II, dated the 
28th  March, 1972 (Annex I), wherein it was laid down that officers obtained on 
deputation should be reverted to their parent department on the expiry of the period of 
deputation.  

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 573 
 
 
 
2.  
In the interest of efficient administration, it is reiterated that the above 
mentioned instructions should be followed rigidly and the deputationists reverted to their 
parent department on the expiry of the period of deputation unless the intention is to 
permanently absorb the deputationist in the cadre or department where he is serving on 
deputation and the recruitment rules for the post provide for such a course. In such cases, 
the consent of the deputationist to the suspension or termination of lien on his permanent 
post in the parent department, as well as the agreement of the parent department, should 
be obtained. With the completion of these formalities, the deputationist will be treated as 
regular member of the establishment of the borrowing department. 
 
3.  
Where, however, it is not intended to permanently absorb the deputationist 
in the borrowing department, the deputationist must not be allowed to remain away from 
his parent cadre for unduly protracted period; he should be reverted to the parent 
department on expiry of the period of deputation as originally fixed. If the borrowing 
department needs the services of another officer having the qualifications or experience 
possessed by the deputationist, a request should be made to the lending department to 
depute some other officer in his place possessing the same qualifications or experience as 
far as possible. The borrowing department in no case should insist on retaining a 
particular individual beyond the original period of deputation. 
 
4.  
All Ministries, Divisions and Departments are requested to examine the 
cases of deputationists with them and take necessary action in the light of the above 
instructions. If relaxation of these orders is required in any individual case, it may be 
referred to Establishment Division with full justification. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 1(28)/75-D.II, dated 6-3-1975]. 
(ANNEX I) 
(See Sl. No. 10.3) 
[Copy of Establishment Division O.M. No. 1(28)/71-D. II, dated the 28th  March, 1972]. 
 
The question has been raised whether the instructions issued in the 
Establishment Division O.M. No.1/23/71-D.II, dated 29th July, 1971 (Annex II) 
regarding proforma promotion apply also to past cases where proforma promotions had 
already been made prior to the issue of these instructions. The Ministries and Divisions 
are advised to review all such cases. If the officer had been allowed to proceed on 
deputation for a specific period, he should be required to revert to the parent department 
on expiry of that period. In case no period was specified, the parent department should 
examine the propriety of recalling the officer to the parent cadre as it is not 
administratively desirable that officers and staff should remain away from their parent 
cadre for unduly long period, say, more than 3 years in the case of gazetted officers and 5 
years in the case of non-gazetted staff. However, if in the case of a particular department 
the number involved is large, the recall of the deputationists should be judiciously 
staggered so that no large scale reversions are caused in the parent office consequent on 
the recall of the deputationists. Priority in recall should be given to those who have been 
allowed proforma promotion in the parent cadre.  Where, however, the borrowing 
departments are prepared to confirm such officers and staff on their own establishment 
(provided this is admissible in accordance with the recruitment rules applicable to the 

  Page - 574                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
post) and the officer or staff is also willing to be so absorbed, reversion to parent cadre 
may not be insisted upon. 
(ANNEX II) 
(See Sl. No. 10.3) 
[Copy of Establishment Division O.M. No. 1/28/71-D.II, dated the 29th July, 1971]. 
 
The Ministries and Divisions, as well as Attached Departments and Subordinate 
Offices, have, in the past, been ordering proforma promotions (also called promotions in 
absentia) of persons serving on deputation on foreign service, or in ex-cadre posts, as a 
matter of course on the sole ground that the deputationists had been approved for 
promotion by the D.P.C. of the parent department and a person junior to him had been 
promoted. This has resulted in the deputationists serving away from their parent 
department or cadre for unduly long periods as such persons not only enjoy better 
emoluments while on deputation but also feel secure that their interests are being fully 
protected in their own departments. 
 
2.  
The intention underlying proforma promotions is to protect the interests of 
the government servant only in circumstances where the government servant is required 
to serve away from his parent cadre because of a definite requirement of public interest 
and not merely to suit his own interests. Normally, therefore, a deputationist, as soon as 
he becomes due for promotion, should be required to revert to his parent department or 
cadre so that he is promoted to the next higher post for which he may have been declared 
fit.  In case an offer of promotion is made to him and he declines to revert, he may be 
allowed to remain in the outside post on the clear understanding that he will not ask for 
proforma promotion.  Only in exceptional cases where the borrowing department or 
organization expresses its inability to spare the officer, and the head of the parent 
department records, in writing, why he considers it necessary to keep the government 
servant on deputation in the ex-cadre appointment, may proforma promotions be made.  
Even in such cases the period for which the officer is allowed to continue to remain on 
deputation, with the benefit of proforma promotion, should be judiciously fixed so that 
the officer reverts to his cadre and is appointed to the post for which he has been 
approved for promotion, as early as possible.  Such period should not normally exceed 6 
months. All cases, where proforma promotions are allowed for a period exceeding 6 
months, should be reported to the Establishment Division with full justification. 
 
3.  
The Ministries/Divisions are also advised that in future whenever they 
send an officer or member of the staff on deputation to an ex-cadre post, or on foreign 
service, they should settle in advance the period of deputation with the borrowing 
office/organization on the expiry of which the government servant should revert to his 
parent cadre.  While selecting persons for deputation, care should also be taken not to 
depute officers who would soon be coming up for promotion to the next rank in their own 
cadre and may have to be re-called.  In the majority of cases, officers and staff are sent on 
deputation on their application or request. They should be warned that in case they fall 
due for promotion, they will have to revert to their parent cadre and they will not be 
allowed promotions in absentia. 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 575 
 
 
 
4.  
The above instructions do not apply to senior appointments in 
international organizations such as the United Nations, the R.C.D. Secretariat, etc. to 
which officers are nominated by government having regard to their qualifications, 
experience and suitability. In such cases it may be presumed that the services of the 
officer have been placed on deputation with the foreign organization in the public 
interest, and  proforma promotion, when called for, may be made. 
10.4 
Lien of Government Servants –  
Objective and Administrative  
Implications 
 
F.R. 14-A(b) provides that the lien suspended under F.R. 14 (a) (2) cannot be 
terminated while the government servant remains in government service except on his 
written request. The effect of this provision is that in a case where a government servant 
is appointed in a substantive capacity to a permanent post outside the cadre on which he 
is borne, he can retain his suspended lien in his parent cadre for the entire period of his 
service under the government, vide Government decision below F.R. 14-A.  It is possible 
that the exercise of this right will result in certain administrative difficulties in some 
cases. 
 
2.  
These rules have been framed with a view to safeguarding the legitimate 
rights of government servants.  It is not contemplated that their provisions should be so 
exploited as to cause administrative inconvenience to government.  In a case, therefore, 
where the competent administrative authority feels that the retention of a suspended lien, 
on the post by a government servant after his appointment in a substantive capacity to an 
ex-cadre post for an indefinite period thereafter if the consent required for its termination 
under F.R. 14-A(b) is not given, is likely to cause administrative inconvenience, it is open 
to that authority not to allow, as a purely administrative measure, the making of the 
substantive appointment on the ex-cadre post.  This is fully permissible and is not 
connected with the provisions of these rules.  The Ministries and Divisions etc., may 
kindly note this for guidance and issue suitable instructions to the administrative 
authorities subordinate to them, emphasizing the necessity of having this point considered 
before substantive appointments in ex-cadre posts of government servants holding liens 
or suspended liens in the cadres administered by them are allowed.  In this connection 
attention is invited to the Ministry of Finance endorsement No. 600-RIII/52, dated the 6th 
March, 1952 according to which borrowing departments etc., are required to consult the 
lending departments before confirming lent officers in the posts under the former‘s 
control. 
[Authority.- Finance Division‘s O.M. No. 8/36/59-E. XIl, dated 13-3-1961]. 
 
10.5 
Procedure for Confirmation of Deputationists 
 
Reference.— Ministry of Finance letter No.F.10(23) - EGII/ 48, dated the 10th 
June, 1949. 
 
2.   
It has been brought to notice that there have been cases in which 
permanent officers belonging to a department or government while on deputation to 
another department or government have been confirmed in the latter without the formal 
                                                          
 ECO/Successor Organization 

  Page - 576                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
concurrence of the former which is essential as stipulated in the Ministry of Finance letter 
No. F. 10 (23)EGII/48, dated the 9th December, 1948.  It is requested that when an officer 
is confirmed in the borrowing government or department, prior formal concurrence of the 
lending government or department as well as the consent of the officer concerned should 
be obtained. 
[Authority.- Finance Division‘s letter No. 600-RIII/52, dated 6-3-1952]. 
 
10.6 
Confirmation of Deputationists  
by Borrowing Offices 
 
There are a number of government servants who are substantive holders of 
permanent posts in one office but are on deputation to another. It has been brought to the 
notice of the Establishment Division that sometimes when such a government servant, 
during the course of his service in the borrowing office, is confirmed, the parent office is 
not informed.  As this practice causes administrative inconvenience to the parent office, it 
should be avoided. As laid down in the Ministry of Finance letter No. 600-RIII/52, dated 
the 6th  March, 1952  permanent officers belonging to a government or department, while 
on deputation to another government or department, should not be confirmed in the latter 
without the prior formal concurrence of the former and the consent of the officer 
concerned.  Once such confirmation is decided upon, after taking also into consideration 
the point emphasized in the Establishment Division O.M. No. 8/36/59-E.XII, dated the 
13th  March, 1961, a copy of the resultant confirmation orders should be endorsed to the 
lending government or department. 
 
2.  
Should such a government servant continue to serve the borrowing 
government or department till the time of his retirement from service, information to the 
effect that he is being retired should be furnished to the lending government or 
department, unless the lien of the government servant in his parent cadre had been 
terminated at the time of his confirmation in the ex-cadre post, as visualized in the 
Establishment Division Office Memorandum, dated the 13th March, 1961  referred to in 
the preceding paragraph. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 8/7/64-F.I, dated 19-10-1964]. 
10.7 
Counting of Period of Formal Promotion  
Towards Increment on Reversion to  
Parent Office  
 
It has been decided in consultation with the Ministry of Finance, that the persons 
on deputation to other offices who are appointed formally (and not actually) to officiate 
in accordance with paragraph 5 of the Office Memorandum, dated the 31st March, 1951, 
may be allowed to count the period of such officiating service towards increments in 
those higher posts, on reversion to their parent offices. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 6/15/48-MEI, dated 30-1-1953]. 
 
11.1 Application of Section Officers for Ex-Cadre Posts 
 
Instances have come to the notice of the Establishment Division that Ministries/ 
Divisions are forwarding applications of their Section Officers for appointment against 
ex-cadre posts without prior clearance of the Establishment Division, and the matter is 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 577 
 
 
referred to this Division for appointment to such posts on ex-post facto basis. This 
practice is not in order and violates the instructions contained in this Division Office 
Memorandum No. 3/7/68-C.III, dated 7-2-1970 and 23-10-1971 Ministries/Divisions are 
requested kindly to adhere strictly to the instructions under reference. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 11/11/73-C.III(B), dated 2-4-1973]. 
 
11.2 
Deputation of Section Officers  
Against Other Posts  
 
A reference is invited to the Establishment Division O.M. No. 3/7/68-C.III, 
dated the 7th February, 1970 (Annex) on the above subject. It is stated that it has been 
decided that all applications of Section Officers for deputation to ex-cadre posts under the 
Government or Semi-Government Organizations will be in the first instance, scrutinised 
and examined by a Committee consisting of the Joint Secretary and Deputy Secretary of 
the Establishment Division and a representative of, at least Deputy Secretary‘s level of 
the Ministry/Division under whose administrative control the ex-cadre posts in question 
belong. 
 
2.  
All Ministries/Divisions are accordingly requested to forward all 
applications received from Section Officers for appointment to any ex-cadre posts to the 
Establishment Division at least one month before the last date prescribed for the receipt 
of such applications by the authority concerned. While forwarding any application to the 
Establishment Division, the Ministry/ Division concerned should certify that the 
candidate possesses the requisite qualifications and experience prescribed for the post and 
that they will have no objection to release him if he is selected for the appointment. 
 
3.  
In cases where the Section Officers are to be considered alongwith officers 
belonging to other services the recruiting agency should invariably forward a copy of the 
notification to the Establishment Division for reference. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No.3/7/68-C.III(B), dated 23-10-1971]. 
(ANNEX) 
 
[Copy of Establishment Division‘s O.M. No. 3/7/68-C-III, dated the  
7th February, 1970]. 
 
It was decided by the government in early 1968, vide point No. 6 in the 
Establishment Division Office Memorandum No.1/ 11/66-C. III, dated the 14th February, 
1968, that deputation of CSS officers to autonomous bodies, attached/subordinate 
offices should be encouraged to give them field experience.  Pursuant to that decision, 
Ministries/Divisions have been deputing officers to other organizations but apparently in 
a haphazard manner.  The following guidelines are, therefore, laid down for observance 
by all concerned:- 
(a) 
While framing recruitment rules for the posts in government and 
autonomous organizations for which the services of Section Officers can 
be gainfully utilized, the question of making them eligible for such 
appointments may be considered by the administrative Ministries/ 
                                                          
 Central Secretariat Service (CSS), now Office Management Group (OMG),  

  Page - 578                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
Divisions concerned in consultation with the Regulations Wing of the 
Establishment Division and the Central Public Service Commission, 
where necessary. 
(b) 
Where recruitment rules have already been framed, the question of 
revising them with a view to making a provision as proposed at (a) above, 
may be considered by the Ministries/Divisions concerned. 
(c) 
Where Section Officers are to be considered alongwith officers belonging 
to other services, then applications may be invited by the recruiting 
agency. Such applications from Section Officers will invariably be routed 
through the Establishment Division vide their O.M. No. 1/8/62-C. III, 
dated the 14th May, 1966. 
(d) 
For the posts against which only Section Officers are to be considered for 
appointment, the Ministries/Divisions concerned may place their 
requirements with the Establishment Division indicating:- 
(i) 
Educational qualifications and experience prescribed for the post. 
(ii) 
Pay Scale etc. prescribed for it. 
(iii) Nature of the duties attached to it. 
(iv) Method of selection. 
(v) 
Any other special points required to be kept in view while making 
selection. 
(e) 
No Section Officer will be allowed to stay away on deputation for more 
than five years. 
 
11.3 
Gazetted and Non-Gazetted  
Technical Services  
 
A question has been raised whether the instructions contained in the 
Establishment Division O.M. No. 6/15/48-ME, dated the 30th January, 1953 are 
applicable to Gazetted and non-Gazetted technical services also. The matter has been 
considered in the Establishment Division, and it has been decided that there should be no 
objection to the cases of officials of the gazetted and non-gazetted technical services 
being decided in accordance with these instructions provided that the procedure laid 
down in Para 11 of the Establishment Division O.M. No. 6/15/48-ME, dated the 31st  
March, 1951 is observed in each case. 
 
2.  
These instructions will take effect from 1st January, 1961. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 11/6/60-E, XI, dated 18-1-1961]. 
 
12.1 Deputationists from Provincial Governments  
 
The question has been raised whether, with the substitution of efficiency 
honorarium for advance increments, it is still necessary for the Ministries/Divisions to 
obtain the consent of the lending Provincial Governments before recommending 
                                                          
 Federal. 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 579 
 
 
deputationists for the grant of efficiency honorarium. After a careful consideration of the 
financial aspect of the matter, it has been decided that it will not be necessary for the 
Ministries/Divisions to obtain the consent of the lending Provincial Governments before 
recommending deputationists for the grant of efficiency honorarium provided the 
recommendations are not based on the recommendees‘ good performance under the 
Provincial Governments. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 5/l/63-CV/LR.II, dated 13-3-1965]. 
 
12.2 
Change in Terms and Conditions  
of Deputationists 
 
A case has recently come to the notice of the Establishment Division in which a 
BPS 5 employee of a Provincial Government on deputation to the Federal Government 
was promoted to a BPS-16 post and subsequently to a BPS 17 post while on deputation, 
without consultation with the Provincial Government concerned. This has created an 
awkward situation for the Provincial Government in the matter of fixation of pay, grant 
of pension, etc. to the employee concerned on repatriation from deputation. 
 
2.  
It may be recalled that a government servant on deputation continues to be 
under the rule-making control of the lending government and is governed by the rules of 
the lending government in matters of pay, leave, pension, etc. The lending government 
accordingly have a right to determine, in consultation with the borrowing government, 
the terms of his employment under the latter and these terms should not be varied by the 
borrowing government without consulting the lending government. 
 
3.  
In view of the position explained above, it is brought to the notice of all 
the Ministries/Divisions etc. that no increase in pay or improvement in other service 
prospects should be allowed to any employee on deputation without consulting the 
lending government or department and without the approval of the Establishment 
Division. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.1/4/86-R.I. dated 3-4-1986]. 
12.3 
Ruling Regarding Employees from Provinces/ 
Authority on Deputation to Federation 
 
Under clause (2) of section 1 of the Civil Servants Act, 1973, that Act applies 
only to civil servants.  Under sub-clause (i) clause (b) of section 2 of that Act persons 
who are on deputation to the Federation from any Province or other authority have been 
excluded from the definition of ―civil servant‖. Therefore the Act or the Rules made 
thereunder are not applicable to such persons.  Any rules having the force of law applying 
to such persons and existing before the coming into force of the permanent Constitution 
are to be treated as ―existing laws‖, as defined in clause (7) of Article 268 of the 
Constitution and will continue to be in force by virtue of clause (1) of that Article. Under 
Article 241 of the Constitution also until the Parliament makes a law under Article 240 of 
the Constitution governing such persons, all rules and orders in force immediately before 
the commencing day are to continue in force in so far as they are not inconsistent with the 
provisions of the Constitution. 
[Authority.- Law Division‘s U.O. Note No. 763/75-Law, dated 13-5-1975]. 

  Page - 580                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
12.4 
Convention Between the Federal Government and  
the Provincial Governments ‗Inter-Se‘ Regarding  
Terms and Conditions of Deputationists  
 
As a government servant on deputation retains a lien on the permanent post in 
his parent office, he is ordinarily governed by the rules of the lending government in 
matters of pay, leave, pension, etc., and continues to be under the rule-making control of 
the lending government which has a right to recall him.  The lending government 
accordingly has a right to determine in consultation with the borrowing government, the 
terms of his employment under the latter, and these terms should not be varied by the 
borrowing government without consulting the lending government. 
 
2. 
A convention has been established between the Federal Government and 
the Provincial Governments on the one hand, and the Provincial Governments inter-se, on 
the other to the effect that no increase in pay or improvements in other service prospects 
should be offered to any such officer without consulting the lending government or 
department. 
[Authority.- Ministry of Finance letter No.F.10(23)-E.G.II/48, dated 9-12-1948 and 10-6-1949]. 
12.5 
Appointment of Provincial Government Employees Against  
BPS 17 and Above Posts Under the Federal Government 
 
A question has arisen whether appointment to posts in BPS 17 and above under 
the Federal Government by appointment through deputation of officers of Provincial 
Governments are required to be approved by the competent authority in the Federal 
Government and if so under which legal-provision. 
 
2. 
 According to section 5 of the Civil Servants Act, 1973 appointment to 
civil posts in connection with the affairs of the Federation are made by the President or 
by an officer authorised by him in this behalf.  Under Rule 6 of the Civil Servants 
(Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973 made under the above mentioned 
Act, 1973 the appointing authority for the posts in BPS 17 and above is the Prime 
Minister.  Therefore, according to section 5 of the Act read with Rule 6, the approval of 
the Prime Minister is necessary for appointment to posts under the Federal Government, 
but a doubt has arisen in the case of appointment of officers belonging to Provincial 
Governments to posts under the Federal Government.  The Civil Servants Act, 1973 is 
applicable to civil servants vide sub-section (2) of Section 1 of the Act.  According to 
definition of ―civil servant‖ given in section 2 of the Act, a person who is on deputation 
to the Federation from any Province is  not  a  ―civil  servant‖. The Civil Servants Act, 
1973 does not, therefore, apply to cases of officers of Provincial Governments who are 
appointed by deputation to posts under the Federal Government.  If this view is correct, 
the next question which arises is whether Article 241 of the Constitution would be 
attracted in such cases.  Our view is that since no act has been made by the Legislature in 
respect of the officers belonging to Provincial Governments who may be appointed by 
deputation to posts under the Federal Government, the rules and orders which were 
enforced immediately before the coming into force of the Constitution, will continue to 
be applicable to such cases.  This will mean that approval of the competent authority as 
required under the Rules of Business, 1973  which  were  applicable before coming into 
force of the Constitution should be obtained in such cases. Under these rules, the 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 581 
 
 
approval of the President was necessary to first appointment to Class I posts under the 
Federal Government.  The President, in the present context means the Prime Minister.  
The approval of the Prime Minister, or of the persons authorized by him in this behalf, 
should therefore, be obtained before making appointments of officers of the Provincial 
Governments to posts connected with the affairs of the Federation.  In other words, if the 
Civil Servants Act, 1973 is not applicable to deputationists from the Provincial 
Governments, we are not left in void.  The law provides for the continuance in force of 
all previous rules and orders where the Civil Servants Act, 1973 is not applicable. 
 
3.  
The Law Division is requested for advice on the views of the 
Establishment Division. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s U.0.Note No.4/1/74-D.III, dated 8-5-1975] 
12.6 Posting on Deputation 
 
It has been observed by the competent authority that Ministries/ Divisions/ 
Departments/Organizations usually posts officer of BS-17 to BS-19 from Provincial 
Government to Federal Government and from Federal Government to Provincial 
Government on deputation basis under delegation of powers.  
 
2. 
 Keeping in view the competent authority has decided that in future, all the 
Divisions/Organizations/Departments and the Provincial Governments have to process 
the cases of the officers from BS-17 & above to be posted on deputation basis from 
Federal Government to provincial government and from provincial government to 
Federal Government through Establishment Division.  
    [Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M No.1/121/2015-E-4, dated 10-08-2015] 
 
12.7 Decision on Leave, or Deputation or for  
any other Purpose out of Cadre Position  
 
 
The competent authority i.e. Worthy Secretary Establishment has been pleased 
to approve that all officers who proceed on leave or deputation or for any other purpose 
out of cade positions for a year or more, must report to Establishment Division upon 
return. It must be mentioned in their notifications and applied to all officers in future as 
well as officers availing such dispensation at the moment.  
[Authority:— Establishment Division‘s U.O Note No. PF. (1061)/E-5(PAS): dated 04-09-2019]. 
12.8 Deputation of Officers/Staff in  
Gilgit Baltistan of the Federation/  
Provinces and Vice Versa 
 
Government of Pakistan have decided that the officers/staff employed in the 
*Gilgit Baltistan should be made interchangeable with comparable categories of 
officers/staff working in other parts of the country, including the provinces. This decision 
may kindly be brought to the notice of all concerned for information and necessary 
action. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s letter No.15/3/73-AV, dated 12-5-1973] 
                                                          
 Previously Northern Areas. 

  Page - 582                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
12.9 Bar Against Asking Officers by  
Name for Posting in Corporations/  
Autonomous Bodies  
 
There is a growing number of cases where government servants have 
approached the various Ministries and Divisions and have managed to obtain offers by 
name for posting to the Ministry/Division concerned or to a corporation or autonomous 
body under them.  It has also come to notice that the corporations and autonomous bodies 
negotiate directly with officers serving in other departments and Ministries and ask for 
their release for posting with them.  This procedure is neither regular nor proper. The 
posts generally carry additional benefits like special pay, deputation allowances etc.  It is, 
therefore, not fair to confine selection to one or two names which a Ministry/Division 
may specify. Other officers with requisite qualification and experience with equal, if not 
better, record of service and senior to those asked for are not considered simply because 
they do not happen to be known to senior officers in the Ministry or Corporation wanting 
such officers. 
 
2.  
The Establishment Division will not now entertain requests for particular 
officers. This Division will be constrained to take disciplinary action against a 
government servant, if it is established that he has secured offer through influence or 
pressure. It is, therefore, requested that all Ministries and Divisions should communicate 
their requirements to the Establishment Division specifying the qualifications and 
experience etc. required for the incumbent of a post.  The selection of a suitable officer 
will be made by the Establishment Division from amongst all those government servants 
who answer the required qualification and experience etc.  In making the selection, the 
Establishment Division will continue to consult the referring Ministry.  If there are any 
special considerations for which the services of a particular officer are required, such 
requests should come at the level of Secretary or Additional Secretary Incharge of 
Division and it should be clearly explained why a particular officer is being asked for. 
 
3.  
So far as corporations are concerned, the Establishment Division propose 
to prepare panels of officers of various occupational groups in different grades whose 
services may be lent to the corporations. All future postings to corporations will be made 
out of these panels. Appointment will be made for a period of at least two years during 
which the officer will not be eligible for consideration for promotion in his parent 
department.  Officers within the zone of promotion will not, as far as possible, be 
included in the panels with a view to obviating the possibility of dislocation in the work 
of the corporation in the event of their recall on promotion by the Ministry concerned. 
[Authority.- Estt. Secretary‘s D.O. letter No.4/l/75-A.R.C., dated 24-6-1975]. 
Sl.No. 13 
Bar Against Allowing Officers to go on Deputation Against Lower Posts  
 
It has come to the notice of the government that some Ministries/Divisions 
allowed their officers to go on deputation to foreign service in Pakistan to posts lower in 
                                                          
 Services to be added. 
 BPS. 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 583 
 
 
emoluments and responsibility than what they had in the government. This resulted in 
wasteful utilization of government officers, embarrassment to the officers and difficulties 
in fixing their emoluments. 
 
2.  
It has, therefore, been decided to request the Ministries/ Divisions that 
they should not henceforth depute any of their officers to a post which is lower in 
emoluments and responsibility than the one he is holding in his parent office. 
[Authority.-Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 3/5/ 68-A.III, dated 19-3-1968]. 
 
14.1 Benefit of Promotion in Parent Cadre while in Foreign Service  
 
It appears that the position regarding promotion, in their parent cadres, of 
government servants transferred to ‗foreign service‘ [as defined in Fundamental Rule 9(7)], 
and the benefit occurring to them from such promotion is not clear in some quarters. 
 
2.  
Cases of promotion, in their parent cadres, of government servants who are 
transferred to foreign service and the emoluments admissible to them are regulated by the 
provisions of Fundamental Rules 113 and 114 which fall in Chapter XII of Section I of the 
Fundamental and Supplementary Rules, Vol. I, and not by the proviso to the `next below 
rule‘ i.e., the second proviso below F.R. 30 which falls in Chapter IV of those Rules and 
applies in cases of government servants serving outside their ordinary line within 
government service. 
 
3.  
According to F.R. 113, a government servant transferred to foreign service 
remains in the cadre in which he was included in a substantive or officiating capacity 
immediately before his transfer and may be given such substantive or officiating promotion 
in those cadres as the authority competent to order promotion may decide, keeping in view 
the considerations mentioned in that rule. According to F. R. 114, read with orders issued 
thereunder, which have been printed in Appendix No. II to the Fundamental and 
Supplementary Rules, Vol. II, a government servant transferred to `foreign service‘ in 
Pakistan shall, unless his duties in foreign service involve a decided increase in work or 
responsibility in comparison with duties of his post in government service, be allowed the 
same remunerations as he would have received from time to time in government service but 
for his transfer to foreign service. It follows from these orders that if a government servant 
who is on deputation to foreign service is promoted in his parent cadre, he should, if he 
continues to remain in foreign service, be allowed the remuneration which he would have 
received in the higher post in government service to which he is promoted. The higher 
remuneration would, of course, be payable by the foreign employer. 
[Authority.- Finance Division‘s O.M. No. F. 6(4)-R2/65, dated 9-2-1966]. 
14.2 
Drawal of Rewards, Remuneration  
and Other Concessions Not  
Specifically Sanctioned 
 
Government Order under F.R. 114 and para 1 of Appendix 11 to Fundamental 
Rules, and Supplementary Rules, Vol. II provides that no government servant shall be 
permitted to receive any remuneration or enjoy any concession which is not specifically 
settled, and that if the sanctioning authority is silent as to any particular benefit it must be 
assumed that it shall not be enjoyed. 

  Page - 584                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
 
2.  
Audit Instruction No. 2 below F.R. 114 reads that government servants on 
foreign service cannot accept any reward or remuneration not covered by the terms of 
their transfer to foreign service unless it is specially sanctioned subsequently by the 
authority competent to sanction their transfer to foreign service. 
 
3.  
It has come to the notice of the government that the above provisions of 
the rules/instructions have not been followed by some of the autonomous/ 
semi-autonomous/ statutory bodies. In flagrant violation of rules/instructions, government 
servants on deputation to autonomous bodies etc. have been allowed the services of 
Peons/Orderlies exclusively for residence, Chowkidar and servants at the residence and 
transport exclusively for the deputationist without the knowledge and sanction of 
competent authority. Government have taken serious note of such irregularities.  With a 
view to ensuring financial discipline, the Provincial Governments and the autonomous 
bodies are requested to discontinue, forthwith, such unauthorized concessions being 
enjoyed by the government servants on deputation. 
[Authority.- Finance Division‘s O.M. No. 1(32)/ 69-A.III, dated 12-7-1969]. 
 
15.1 Recovery of Leave Salary and Pension Contribution in Respect of 
Federal Government Employees on Deputation to Foreign Service 
within Pakistan or Abroad  
 
In accordance with Fundamental Rule 116, the rates of contributions payable 
on account of pension and leave salary shall be such as the President may by general 
orders, prescribe. The existing rates are contained in Appendix 11-A, FRs and SRs Vol. 
II. The question regarding revision of the rates and mode of recovery etc., of leave salary 
and pension contributions has been engaging the attention of the government for some 
time past.  It has now been decided to  prescribe a uniform rate of recovery of pension 
contributions at 33.33% of the mean of minimum and maximum of the pay scale of the 
***grade held by the government servant concerned at the time of his proceeding on 
foreign service, plus other emoluments (reckonable for pension) which would have been 
admissible to him had he not been deputed on foreign service.  The above prescribed rate 
of pension contribution shall apply to all Federal Government employees whether on 
deputation to foreign service within Pakistan or abroad. 
 
2.  
In future, the pension contributions in all cases shall be payable by the 
foreign employers. However, in the case of government servants presently on deputation 
to foreign service@ within Pakistan or abroad, pension contributions shall be paid by the 
foreign employers or the government servants concerned, as the case may be, according 
to the agreed terms of deputation. 
 
3.  
As regards leave salary contributions, it has been decided that no leave 
salary contributions shall be recovered from foreign employers, but leave/leave salary 
shall be sanctioned/paid during the period of foreign service by the foreign employers.  
The Federal Government employees sent on deputation to *foreign service who, under the 
                                                          
Naib Qasid. 
 Recovery of Leave Salary and Pension contributions may be made as per revised rates as amended from time 
to time.  
 BPS. 
@ Deputation 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 585 
 
 
revised procedure, are granted leave and paid leave salary by the foreign employers, shall not 
count the period spent on foreign service for earning leave under the Government of 
Pakistan. 
 
4.  
These orders shall take effect from 01-01-1982. Formal amendments to the 
relevant rules shall be issued separately. 
[Authority.- Finance Division‘s O.M. No. F. 5(5) Reg.7/79-1407, dated 15-12-1981]. 
 
15.2 
Procedure for Recovery of Leave  
Salary and Pension Contributions  
 
According to the procedure laid down in Part VI of Appendix 3 of FRs and SRs, 
Vol. II, a copy of the orders sanctioning a government servant‘s transfer to foreign 
service should always be communicated to Audit and Accounts Officer concerned. The 
terms and conditions of foreign service and other detailed particulars regarding pay to be 
drawn in foreign service are required to be furnished to the Audit and Accounts Officer 
so that the rates of monthly leave salary and pension contributions are intimated to 
foreign employer, the government servant concerned and his department. Any promotion 
or reversion in the parent department is also to be reported to the Audit and Accounts 
Officer concerned. The contributions paid into the government account are accounted for 
by the Audit and Accounts Office and recoveries in individual cases are watched. 
 
2.  
It has come to the notice of the Finance Division that in several cases the 
orders of transfer of a government servant on foreign service do not reach the Audit and 
Accounts Office concerned or, if received, the terms and conditions and other particulars 
are not given therein. Consequently, the rates of monthly contribution cannot be 
intimated by the Audit and Accounts Office to the foreign employer and the government 
servant concerned, with the result that the contributions are not deposited promptly and 
regularly.  There have been many cases in which the government servants completed 
their tenure of foreign service in Pakistan or abroad and returned to their parent 
department without depositing the leave salary and pension contributions due to the 
reason that the Audit and Accounts Office concerned is not informed  in  time  about  
their  transfer on  **foreign service. The required particulars are not furnished by the 
department to the Audit and Accounts Office and consequently the latter are not in a 
position to intimate the rates of monthly contributions resulting in their non-deposit. In 
case of deputations abroad, loss of foreign exchange is suffered by government if the 
pension contribution is payable by the government servant and he returns to Pakistan on 
completion of his tenure without depositing the contribution for the reason that the 
amount was not intimated to him in due time. 
 
3.  
In view of the position stated above, all Ministries/Divisions are requested 
to ensure that in future all sanctions regarding the deputation on foreign service are 
invariably addressed to the Accounts Offices concerned. While sanctioning the transfer of 
a government servant on foreign service, the monthly rates of leave salary and pension 
contribution should be invariably indicated in the sanction. The rates so indicated by the 
departments concerned may be provisionally adopted for depositing the contributions 
promptly and regularly every month till the final rates are intimated by the Audit and 
                                                          
Note.-Under the latest orders no leave-salary contributions are recoverable from the foreign employer/ 
government servant. 
** Deputation. 

  Page - 586                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
Accounts Offices on receipt of which the excesses/deficiencies, if any, can be adjusted. 
The Audit and Accounts Officers will check the accuracy of the rates and watch the 
recoveries of the contributions and their proper accounting in the government accounts. 
[Authority.- Finance Division‘s O.M.No.F.5(5) Reg.7/77-1082-(2), dated 28-2-1980]. 
15.3 
Recoveries of Dues from Government  
Servants in Foreign Exchange 
 
A reference is invited to the Finance Division O.M. No. F. 1(8) EF (B. 
II)/76-2720 dated the 14th July, 1976. It is stated that the question of recoveries from 
government servants due in foreign exchange has been re-examined in consultation with 
the Ministry of Law.  The position is that the government is legally entitled to recover the 
exact amount in the currency in which the overpayment was made or the dues became 
recoverable.  It has, therefore, been decided that if the overpayment was made or dues 
became recoverable in a particular currency, the recoveries should be made in that 
currency or in equivalents of US dollars according to the rate of exchange between that 
currency and the US dollar on the date of recovery.  If, for any reason, such as posting in 
Pakistan on retirement, etc. recoveries cannot be effected in foreign exchange these can 
be effected in Pakistani rupees.  However, since permission to pay such dues in local 
currency is in fact permission to purchase foreign exchange for refund to government the 
rate of exchange applicable in such cases shall be the rate prevailing on the date on which 
such recoveries are actually effected. Finance Division‘s O.M. dated the 14th  July, 1976 
quoted above may please be deemed to have been modified accordingly with immediate 
effect. 
[Authority.- Finance Division‘s O.M.No.F.1(8)EF (B.II)/80-2689, dated 18-12-1980]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 587 
 
 
VIII.   (B) TRANSFER TO FOREIGN SERVICE  
           OUT OF PAKISTAN: DEPUTATION 
 
16.1 Receiving or Soliciting Direct Offers of Appointment 
 
 
from Private Firms/Organizations 
 
It has been noticed that some government servants are directly receiving or 
soliciting offers of appointment from private firms/organisations based in foreign 
countries and are seeking government clearance for accepting such offers on deputation 
basis. This practice, which is on the increase, is against Government Servants (Conduct) 
Rules, 1964. It is obvious that in all cases of this nature, the government servants while 
still in government service, had established contacts with the private firms/ organisations 
offering the appointment. This tendency has to be curbed because it is quite possible that 
the firm/organization, offering the appointment to the government servant concerned, 
may be doing so in consideration of some favour done to the firm by the government 
officer concerned. It has, therefore, been decided that any government servant receiving 
such an offer of employment from a private firm/organisation abroad will not, in future, 
be allowed to go on deputation. He will have to resign from government service before he 
is allowed to accept the appointment with a private firm/organisation based in a foreign 
country. 
 
2.  
These instructions, however, do not affect the offers of appointments or 
submission of applications against vacancies announced by foreign governments or 
international agencies. The existing procedure prescribed in such cases will continue to 
be observed and the relevant cases should be sent for approval to the Special Selection 
Board in the prescribed manner. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No.1/23/ 66-T.IV, dated 6-10-1977]. 
 
16.2 
Adequate Circulation of Vacancy Notice –  
View of Special Selection Board 
 
Extract from the minutes of the meeting of the Special Selection Board is 
reproduced below:— 
 
―The Special Selection Board was of the view that in cases where 
nominations against senior posts were called for, the sponsoring 
Ministries/Divisions should bring the offers to the notice of the 
concerned Ministries/Divisions at the level of the Secretary/Joint 
Secretary.‖ 
 
2.  
It is requested that Ministries/ Divisions concerned may kindly take 
necessary action in the matter as indicated above as soon as job descriptions are received 
by them. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 1/103/ 71-A.VII, dated 30-10-1971]. 
 
 

  Page - 588                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
 
16.3 
Decisions by Special Selection Board 
 
The following decision of the Special Selection Board taken in its meeting held 
on 24th July, 1977 is conveyed for necessary compliance:- 
―Whenever a Ministry/Division receives a vacancy notice from any international 
organization, it may be adequately circulated among the concerned agencies and 
all the applications received be forwarded to the Establishment Division for 
SSB‘s approval with clear recommendations‖. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.1/23/66-A. VII/T.IV, dated 6-8-1977]. 
 
16.4 
Circulation of Vacancy Notices 
 
Despite the instructions contained in the Establishment Division‘s O.M. No. 
1/23/66-T.IV, dated the 23rd June, 1977, instances of inadequate circulation of Vacancy 
Notices received from various international/regional organizations are on the increase. In 
future all Vacancy Notices may please be circulated to all the Ministries/Divisions 
concerned and Provincial Governments and copies of all such notices endorsed to the 
Joint Secretary (Training), Establishment Division, Rawalpindi. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 1/23/ 66-T.IV, dated 16-4-1978]. 
 
16.5 
Circulation of Job Descriptions 
 
It has been observed that the job descriptions of various posts received from the 
international 
organizations 
are 
not 
being 
circulated 
properly 
amongst 
the 
Ministries/Divisions concerned and the Provincial Governments. It has also been noted 
that, in many cases, the nominees are not qualified for the jobs. It has, therefore, been 
decided that in future the Ministries/Divisions should; 
 
(i) 
circulate the vacancy announcements amongst the Ministries/ Divisions 
concerned and Provincial Governments well in time; 
 
(ii) 
nominate only those officers who are properly qualified for the 
jobs; 
 
(iii) nominate, at least, three candidates for each job to enable S.S.B. to pick up 
the best suited candidates; and 
 
(iv) to ensure adequate circulation of job descriptions, the Ministries/ 
Divisions receiving vacancy announcements direct from international 
organizations should send the copies of their circulars to Economic Affairs 
Division and Establishment Division indicating the Ministries/Divisions to 
whom the particular job is being circulated. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 4/3/80-T.IV, dated 18-8-1980]. 
 
                                                          
 Cabinet Block, Islamabad. 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 589 
 
 
 
17.1 Functions of the Special Selection Board 
 
The following decisions taken in the Special Selection Board‘s meeting held on 
13th  October,1977 are conveyed for information and compliance:- 
 
(i) 
All cases of postings of non-Foreign Service officers in Pakistan‘s 
missions abroad like Commercial Secretaries, Educational Attaches, 
Labour Attaches, Information Officers, etc. (excluding Intelligence and 
Defence personnel) should be referred to the Establishment Division for 
clearance of Special Selection Board ; 
 
(ii) 
The cases of deputation of government servants to international agencies 
and foreign governments should, as before, be referred to the Special 
Selection Board for clearance. However, no such case will be entertained 
in which the officers have been received by government officers direct. 
Only such nominations will be entertained as are received by the 
Ministries/Divisions through proper channel. 
 
2.  
It is requested that strict compliance of the foregoing instructions may 
please be ensured. Any instructions issued by a Ministry/Division or the Provincial 
Governments which are not in conformity with the above decisions should please be 
treated as cancelled.  Proposals which do not conform to the revised procedure stated 
above will be returned to the sponsoring Ministries/Divisions unapproved. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 1/23/66-T.IV, dated 26-10-1977]. 
 
17.2 
Procedure for Submission of Cases to S.S.B  
 
It has been noticed that incomplete cases are being forwarded by the Ministries/ 
Divisions to the Establishment Division viz. Economic Affairs Division which results in 
delay. 
 
2.  
Ministries/Divisions are requested to send cases complete in all respect to 
this Division through Economic Affairs Division with the following documents:- 
 
(1)  
Bio-data .........       
 
6 copies 
 
(2) 
Job description ......... 
 
6 copies 
 
(3) 
Summary Statement  
 
 
    
(Proforma attached- 
        
    
Annex).......... 
 
 
6 copies 
 
(4)  
Sparability certificate  
         
 
(signed by the Secretary  
 
    
of Division/Head of  
 
 
Department........  
 
(5)  
C.R. dossier complete with  
         
photograph of the officer  
            thereon........... 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No.1/23/80-T.IV,dated 18-7-1981]. 
                                                          
 Community Welfare Officers. 

  Page - 590                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
(ANNEX) 
 
SUMMARY STATEMENT PROFORMA 
 
Name 
of 
Post 
Name of 
Inter- 
national 
Organi- 
zation 
Job 
Descrip-
tion in 
Brief 
Qualification 
Required by 
the Inter- 
national 
Organization 
Name of 
Officer 
Nominated 
Qualifications 
of the Officer 
Nominated 
Training Experience 
Attached 
Whether  
or not 
Released 
Certificate 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17.3 
Sparability Certificate  
 
The following instructions were issued vide Establishment Division‘s letter No. 
D.1700/79-T.IV, dated 17th November,1979 :- 
 
―The Establishment Division controls Pakistan Administrative Service, 
Tribal Areas Group, Secretariat Group, Police and Office 
Management Group(s) and all service matters of officers of these 
groups are being dealt with by this Division.  It has, therefore, been 
decided that the Establishment Division will be the final authority to 
determine the sparability of officers of the above mentioned groups for 
jobs within or outside Pakistan. The Ministries/Divisions concerned 
would, of course, be provided a substitute of equal ability‖. 
 
2.  
It has been observed that sparability certificates are not issued in 
accordance with the aforesaid instructions. The Special Selection Board is, therefore, 
unable to consider such cases with the result that they get delayed and the facilities lapse.  
To avoid such situations, it is requested that it may please be ensured that the sparability 
certificates of candidates for deputation to foreign government/international agencies 
belonging to the above mentioned groups are issued strictly in accordance with the 
instructions contained in letter No. D.1700/79 T.IV dated the 17th November, 1979. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. D. 1700/79-T.IV, dated 6-10-1981]. 
 
17.4 
Requirement of Second Approval by S.S.B  
 
The Special Selection Board in its meeting held on 28th July, 1981 decided that 
the candidates once approved by it for a job in an international organization will require 
                                                          
 Previously ―District Management Group‖. 
 Police Service of Pakistan. 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 591 
 
 
fresh approval of the Board if they intended to apply subsequently for a similar job in any 
international organization. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 1/221/ 80-T.IV, dated 5-9-1981]. 
 
17.5 
Clearance for Posting Abroad or on Deputation 
 
The President has been pleased to direct that all government personnel being 
posted abroad on government appointments or on deputation with other agencies whether 
they are members of any service group or are professional such as educationists and 
scientists will have to be cleared by the intelligence agencies before they proceed to take 
charge of their assignments.  The names of such persons will be forwarded to the D.I.B., 
ten to twelve weeks before they are scheduled to leave. The individuals will be sent 
abroad only when clearance has been obtained from the Intelligence Bureau. 
 
2.  
It is requested to ensure that the above instructions are enforced strictly 
with immediate effect and government servants under administrative control of Ministries 
proceed abroad only when they have been cleared by the Intelligence Bureau. 
[Authority.- Estt. Secretary‘s D.O. letter No.1/102/83-T-IV, dated 18-7-1983]. 
 
18.1 Standard Terms and Conditions of Service for  
 
 
Government Servants Who Proceed for Service Abroad  
 
In supersession of this Division‘s letter of even number dated the 23rd 
November, 1970, on the subject noted above, the decision of the President is that the 
government servants who proceed for service abroad, whether in government or in 
private sector, will be allowed the following terms and conditions for the period of their 
deputation:- 
 
(1) 
The period of deputation will be treated as foreign service and will 
commence from the date of release from the 
Central Divisions/ 
Provincial Departments and will terminate on the date of resumption of 
duty under the *Central/ Provincial Government. 
 
(2) 
During the period of foreign service, the person concerned will be entitled 
to pay allowances and travelling facilities (including passage for himself 
and his family to the place of employment under the borrowing 
government and back on termination of the contract) in accordance with 
the regulations of or the terms and conditions offered by the borrowing 
government. 
 
(3) 
The person concerned shall, during the period of his foreign service, pay 
to the Government of Pakistan through the Pakistan Mission in the 
borrowing country, in foreign currency in which he receives his salary 
from the foreign employers, pension contribution in accordance with the 
relevant rules of and at the rate prescribed from time to time by 
Government of Pakistan. On delayed payments of these contributions, 
interest shall be payable under S.R. 307. Till such time as the rates of 
pension contribution are ascertained and intimated by the Audit Office 
concerned the person concerned shall provisionally pay pension 
                                                          
 Federal. 

  Page - 592                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
contribution in foreign currency on the basis of the length of his service at 
the rate given in Appendix No.11-A to the F.R. and S.R. Vol.-II. 
 
(4) 
During the period of foreign service, the person concerned will continue to 
subscribe to the G.P. Fund or any other Fund of the same nature of the 
Central/Provincial Government according to the rules and orders 
regulating subscription to that Fund. The amount of subscription is 
payable in foreign exchange and he shall remit the necessary amount in 
foreign exchange every month to a scheduled bank in Pakistan which shall 
pay to the Accounts Officer the rupee equivalent thereof at the official  
rate  of  exchange  on the basis of his pay which would have been 
admissible to him in government service, but for his transfer to foreign 
service. 
 
(5) 
The leave terms of the person concerned during the period of his foreign 
service will be regulated according to the rules of or the terms and 
conditions offered by the borrowing government. Leave salary due in 
respect of such leave will be payable by the borrowing government to the 
person concerned.  No part of the leave earned by him during the period of 
foreign service will be credited to his leave account with the 
***Central/Provincial Government, nor will any liability in respect of 
leave salary on account of such leave devolve on the government. The 
***Central/Provincial Government will not recover any leave salary 
contribution from the borrowing government.  The person concerned will 
also not be entitled to receive any leave salary, from the 
***Central/Provincial government in respect of disability arising in and 
through foreign service with the borrowing government. 
 
(6) 
During the period of foreign service, the person concerned will not be 
entitled to receive any leave salary from ***Central/Provincial 
Government in respect of disability leave on account of any disability 
arising in or through foreign service, even though this disability might 
manifest itself even after the termination of foreign service. 
 
(7) 
During the period of foreign service, the person concerned will not be 
entitled to any medical facility in respect of himself and family members 
at the expense of the ***Central/Provincial Government. 
 
(8) 
The person concerned shall be on deputation with the borrowing 
government for the period originally agreed upon.  Any extension beyond 
the original period of deputation shall not be made without the approval of 
the Government of Pakistan. Any extension without the approval of the 
Government of Pakistan will be treated as an irregularity on the part of the 
person concerned and may call for disciplinary action. 
 
(9) 
Further, if the person concerned during the period of his deputation 
becomes entitled to any additional benefit, or is appointed to any post 
                                                          
 Note.- For latest orders see Finance Div.‘s O.M.No.F-5(5)Regs 7/79-1407, dated 15 12-1981. 
 Note: The rates of pension contributions may be made as per revised rates as amended by Finance Division 
from time to time. 
 Federal. 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 593 
 
 
involving alteration in his emoluments, he will intimate particulars of such 
appointment to the Government of Pakistan for information.  Any 
modifications of the terms involving additional liabilities on the 
government will require their prior approval. 
 
(10) The person concerned shall retain his lien if he is holding a permanent 
post, or if allowed by the Department/Division, as a special case. 
 
2.  
In the case of government servants who are already on deputation abroad, 
sanctions already issued should be amended particularly in the light of sub-paras (4) and 
(5) of the preceding para, under intimation to the government servant and the Accounts 
Officer concerned. 
[Authority.- Labour and Local Bodies Division‘s letter No. 15-1 (18)/70-EI, dated  1-3-1973]. 
 
18.2 
Maximum Period of Employment Abroad  
 
It has been decided that government servants who have gone abroad on their 
own and are in employment with private bodies on contract terms may be allowed to 
remain abroad till termination of their contract period provided that their total period of 
foreign employment does not exceed 5 years. Such government servants should submit 
copies of their contract/ documents, duly authenticated, through the Pakistan Missions 
concerned to their administrative Ministries so that their liens may be maintained and 
they may now be required to return by the 30th June, 1978. 
 
2.  
In this connection, attention of all concerned may be invited to 
Fundamental Rule 18 which lays down that unless the President, in view of the special 
circumstances of the case, shall otherwise determine, after 5 years continuous absence 
from duty, elsewhere than on foreign service in Pakistan, whether with or without leave, 
a government servant ceases to be in government employ. It would therefore be in their 
own interest if the government servants who are serving abroad on their own with private 
organizations or on foreign service terms ensure that the period of 5 years continuous 
absence from duty in Pakistan if not exceeded without proper government sanction. 
 
3.  
The Ministries and Divisions are requested to review immediately the 
cases of the government servants under their administrative control who have been 
continuously absent from their duty owing to their employment with organizations 
outside Pakistan either on their own or on foreign service terms and take steps to ensure 
that those who have completed 5 years period return immediately to their duty in Pakistan 
failing which they shall cease to be in government employ under F.R. 18 except where 
their absence in excess of 5 years is covered by proper government sanction or where 
they are bound by some terms of contract which should be produced by them. In the latter 
cases, the Ministries/ Divisions concerned may take action to obtain government sanction 
in terms of F.R. 18 to cover the period exceeding 5 years. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 1/23/ 66-T.IV, dated 24-6-1978]. 
 

  Page - 594                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
 
18.3 
Extension in Deputation –  
Decision by Special Selection Board 
 
The following decision of the Special Selection Board taken in its meeting held 
on the 24th July, 1977 is conveyed for necessary compliance:- 
 (i)  xxxx       xxxx         xxxx 
 (ii) All the cases of extension be referred to the Establishment Division and 
where the administrative Ministries think that extension should not be 
granted, they may make the recommendations but should obtain the 
approval/decision of the Special Selection Board/ Establishment Division 
invariably in all cases. 
(iii) All extensions upto 5 years may be liberally recommended but beyond 5 
years no extensions should be recommended. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No.1/ 23/ 66-A-VII/T.IV, dated 6-8-1977]. 
 
18.4 
Extension in the Deputation of   
Officers Posted in Pakistan  
Missions Abroad 
 
Reference Establishment Division O.M. No. 1/23/80-T. IV, dated 23rd 
September, 1980 on the subject. It is stated that the period of deputation of non-
diplomatic officers posted in Pakistan Missions abroad should not be more than 3 years. 
 
2.  
According to the current practice, while deputation of these officers is 
approved by the Special Selection Board and the Prime Minister, the extensions in their 
deputation period are being granted by the Ministries/Divisions concerned themselves.  It 
has, however, been noticed that a number of officers have been holding these posts for 
more than 3 years and requests for extensions beyond their normal tenure are not 
uncommon.  To maintain uniformity in granting extensions to the officers posted against 
Pakistani posts abroad, it has been decided that extension for a period of one year may 
continue to be allowed by the Ministries/ Divisions in deserving cases.  However, cases 
involving extension beyond one year should henceforth be put up to the Special Selection 
Board for decision. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No.1/97/ 83/T.IV,  dated 26-3-1986]. 
 
18.5 
Option of Premature Retirement  
by Deputationists Abroad 
 
Reference Establishment Division Office Memorandum No. 1/8/74-AVII/ T.IV, 
dated the 24th September, 1974. In modification of the instructions issued in that Office 
Memorandum, it has been decided that government servants who have completed five 
years abroad and have not completed 25 years of service should be asked to return to 
Pakistan.  Government servants who have completed 25 years of service qualifying for 
pension may opt for retirement from service in Pakistan if they wish to continue in 
international agencies beyond the prescribed tenure of five years. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No.1/8/ 74-A.VII/T.IV, dated 3-12-1974]. 
 
 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 595 
 
 
 
18.6 
Deputation Against Pakistani Posts Abroad 
 
It has been observed that the officers going on deputation abroad against Pakistani 
posts stay abroad beyond the tenure fixed for the posts in question. They ask for extension on 
various grounds and sometimes put pressures for extending their tenure.  The government 
has taken a serious view of the prevailing situation and has decided that the 
Ministry/Division concerned will, in future, automatically move the case for recall of the 
officer 6 months before completion of his normal tenure and submit a panel of names for 
consideration of the Special Selection Board to enable the latter to select a suitable person to 
succeed the officer already abroad. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.1/23/ 80-T.IV, dated 20-8-1980]. 
18.7 
Deputation Against Pakistani Posts  
Abroad – Proposal for Replacement 
 
In continuation of the Establishment Division‘s O.M. No. 1/23/80-T.IV, dated 20th  
August, 1980, it is reiterated that a proposal for replacement of an officer on deputation 
should be initiated six months before his tenure is due to expire. In case an officer is 
promoted during his deputation abroad and has more than six months of his tenure left, he 
should be given a notice of six months to return and join his new post. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 1/23/80-T.IV, dated 23-9-1980]. 
Sl.No. 19 
 
SOPs for Recalling of Officers Posted on Deputation against Pakistan‘s Positions 
Abroad 
               As per standing instructions circulated vide Establishment Division‘s O.M. 
No.1/23/80-T-IV dated 20-08-1980 and O.M No.1/97/83.T-IV dated 26-03-1986. It is 
observed that the controlling Ministries/Divisions in disregard to the above instructions 
do not process cases of recalling of /and or granting extension to officers on deputation to 
Pakistan‘s positions abroad well in time resulting in inordinate delays and lapses. 
Besides, most of the cases of extension beyond one year are referred to the Special 
Selection Board (SSB) at the eleventh hour by the Ministry/Division concerned and they 
also fail to select a substitute for the said post within the stipulated time. The Prime 
Minister has taken a serious view of such delays/negligence and it has therefore been 
decided to direct the administrative/controlling Ministries/Divisions that the following 
standard operating procedures with regard to recalling of and or granting extension to 
officers on deputation to Pakistan‘s position abroad shall be strictly observed to avoid 
such failures in future:— 
i. 
The normal tenure of posting in Pakistan Missions abroad deputation 
against permanent seats of Pakistan in International Organizations shall be 
three years.   
ii. 
No Ministry should extend the period of deputation invariably all such 
cases where an extension in deputation is essential or required under any 
specific circumstances should be referred to SSB at least 08 months before 
the end of tenure. The SSB shall consider the request on merit and furnish 
its recommendations for orders of Prime Minister within 30 days. No 

  Page - 596                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
extension shall be allowed without Prime Minister‘s approval irrespective 
of pay scale of the deputationist.  
iii. 
The parent/administrative/controlling Ministry/Division shall both issue a 
recall notice at least 06 months prior to the end of tenure and also start the 
process of selection of replacement. Failure to do either of the two things 
shall be considered a failure of the Secretary of the Ministry/Division 
concerned. 
iv. 
Medical reasons/study of children abroad should not be considered a 
justification for extension.   
v. 
The parent Ministries/Divisions will remain vigilant regarding tenure and 
recalling of their officers on deputation abroad. In case no reference for 
extension is received or the request of the controlling Ministry/Division for 
extension has not been consented, as the case may be, the parent 
Ministry/Division will issue a recall notice to the officer at least six months 
before expiry of the normal period of deputation. 
vi. 
Such recall notices in respect of officers belonging to Pakistan 
Administrative Service (PAS), Police Service of Pakistan (PSP), 
Secretariat Group and Office Management Group will be issued by the 
respective wings of the Establishment Division holding administrative 
control of these service groups/cadres at least six months before expiry of 
the normal period of deputation. 
 
2.  Failure to observe these procedures or non-compliance of the standing 
instructions on the subject shall render the officers concerned of the Ministries/Divisions/ 
Departments liable to disciplinary action under the Government Servants (Efficiency & 
Discipline) Rules, 1973. 
 
3. 
Ministries/Divisions Provincial Governments are directed to bring the 
above instructions to the notice of all concerned for strict compliance. 
[Authority:— Establishment Division‘s O.M. No.1/9/2004-T-IV dated 17-09-2014]. 
 
20.1 
Deputation of Pakistanis in International  
 
Organisations as Short-Term Consultant  
 
Officers of the Government of Pakistan/Provincial Governments are sometimes 
engaged by international organisations as Consultants and paid consultancy fee plus other 
benefits. Under SR-12, they are required to deposit 1/3rd of the fee into General 
Revenues. It has, however, been noticed that these instructions for crediting portion of the 
fee to government are not being followed by the Ministries/Divisions and Provincial 
governments in the case of consultancies abroad.  The Ministries/ Divisions are requested 
to apply the provisions of SR-12 strictly when officers go abroad as Consultants. 
[Authority—- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 1/27/80-T.IV, dated 13-4-1980]. 
 
                                                          
 Now Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules,2020. 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 597 
 
 
 
20.2 
Consultancy Assignments 
 
Consultancy Assignments. The Special Selection Board has further simplified 
the procedure for consultancy assignments to the following extent:- 
(i) 
consultancy may be allowed for a period not exceeding six months during 
the five years cycle; 
(ii) 
one consultancy should not be for more than 90 days; 
(iii) the Establishment Division may consider any relaxation with regard to (i) 
& (ii) on case to case basis and recommend to the competent authority, if 
deemed appropriate; and 
(iv) all the cases of consultancies relating to officers in BPS 17-22 will be put 
up to the Prime Minister for approval. 
[Authority:– Estab. Div.‘s OM No. 1/8/81-T-TV, dated 13th June, 1996]. 
  
20.3 
Procedure for Deposit of Consultancy Fee 
 
Reference.- Establishment Division‘s O.M. No. 1/27/80-T.  IV, dated 13th April, 
1980. 
 
2. 
It has further been decided by the Special Selection Board that a copy of 
the letter sanctioning terms and conditions of the officers (including the condition that 
one third of the fee/ remuneration may be deposited into the General Revenues) may be 
endorsed, in future, to the AGPR and Accountants General of the Provinces in the case of 
federal and provincial employees respectively as well as to the Pakistan Embassy in the 
country where the officer is taking up the consultancy. One copy should also be sent to 
the Training Wing, Establishment Division. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 1/27/80-T. IV, dated 22-9-1980]. 
 
21.1 Policy Concerning Promotion of Civil  
 
 
Servants on Deputation Abroad 
 
A civil servant, if selected for appointment in any international agency, foreign 
government or private organization abroad, is permitted to go on deputation for a period 
of 3 years extendable to 5 years on the request of the deputationist or his employer.  After 
expiry of the approved period of deputation, the deputationist is required to come back 
and resume duty in the country. 
 
2.  
While on deputation abroad, a civil servant was considered for promotion 
in accordance with his seniority position but actual promotion took place after he 
resumed duty on return to Pakistan. This enabled such civil servants to regain their 
seniority ‗vis-à-vis‘ their juniors on actual promotion.  Experience has shown that despite 
promotion, these officers seldom return even on completion of their approved deputation 
period.  By the time they return, many officers have lost their utility and experience 
relevant to service needs. Promoting such officers immediately on return may not, 
therefore, be in public interest. 
 
3.  
It has, therefore, been decided with the approval of the President that:- 

  Page - 598                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
 
(i) 
Promotion of a civil servant on deputation to an international agency, 
foreign government or private organization abroad will only be considered 
after he resumes duty on return to Pakistan. 
 
(ii) 
Such officers may be given timely intimation to return so that they can 
earn at least one annual confidential report before their cases come up for 
consideration in accordance with their seniority position. 
     
(iii) If an officer returns, his case will be considered for promotion in the 
normal course.  If he does not return in response to such intimation, his 
case will be deferred till he returns to Pakistan on completion of 5 years 
and earns a confidential report on his work for one full year after 
resuming duty. If approved for promotion, he will regain his original 
seniority. 
 
4.  
Government may allow an officer to continue against his assignment 
abroad even after the expiry of 5 years on the request of the officer or his employer.  
However, in all such cases, the officer‘s names will be removed from the existing 
Seniority List and placed on a separate Static list with no claim to promotion or to 
seniority over any junior who may be promoted during this period.  An officer‘s name 
would be brought back on the Seniority List only after he resumes duty on return.  In 
such cases also, the officer must earn a **confidential report for one full year before he is 
considered for promotion. If approved for promotion he will not regain his seniority.  He 
will be assigned seniority in the higher post only from the date he assumes its charge. 
 
5.  
All Ministries/Divisions are requested to bring the above instructions to 
the notice of all civil servants already serving on deputation abroad and those allowed to 
proceed on deputation in future. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.10 (3)/ 81-CP.I dated 25-6-1984]. 
 
21.2 
Policy Governing Civil Servants  
on Deputation Abroad 
 
The Cabinet in its meeting held on 17.4.1989 took the following decision on the 
summary submitted by Manpower and Overseas Pakistanis Division:- 
 
―A maximum of 20% of Government servants in all @grades will be allowed to 
take up overseas employment. For this purpose the Government servants would 
be required to leave their jobs and would not be allowed to retain lien on their 
appointments. This may be considered for appointment on their return, if 
vacancies in the relevant @grades are available‖. 
 
2.  
The deputation abroad covers the following categories:- 
 
(a) 
deputation of officers from Government of Pakistan to a foreign 
government. 
                                                          
 Now Performance Evaluation Report (PER). 
 Performance Evaluation Report. 
 Now Overseas Pakistanis and Human Resource Development Division.  
@ BPS. 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 599 
 
 
 
(b) 
deputation of officers from Government of Pakistan to international 
organizations/agencies; and 
 
(c) 
employment of government servants in private organizations/ agencies at 
their own. 
 
3.  
It is informed that officers coming under categories (a) & (b) at para 2 
above would continue to be governed by the existing policy on the subject issued vide 
Establishment Division‘s O.M. No. 10/3/81.CP.I, dated 25.6.1984. The new policy will 
only apply to the cases covered by para 2 (c) i.e. government servants who take up 
overseas employment in private organizations/agencies on their own, would have to leave 
their jobs without any lien on their appointments in Pakistan. 
 
4.  
The decision contained in this O.M. will come into force with immediate 
effect and will not effect the cases decided prior to its date of issue. 
 
5.  
The above decision of the Cabinet may be widely circulated to all 
concerned. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No.1 (91)/89-T.IV, dated 17-5-1990]. 
21.3 
Size of Family Members of Serving  
Personnel Selected for Secondment  
Abroad 
 
Reference Ministry of Defence U.O. No.2/1/D-17/2000/3519/ Secy, dated April 
24, 2000 and the meeting of Joint Chief Staff Committee held on January 25, 2000, on 
the above subject. The competent authority has been pleased to approve the following:-   
1. 
Individuals already selected for secondment abroad on the process of 
departure and having more than 4 children be given an option to either 
proceed abroad without family or their names be excluded from 
secondment (a certificate to be rendered to this effect by the selected 
individuals). 
2. 
No part families will be permitted for secondment abroad. 
3. 
For uniform government policy on the subject at national level, the 
decision would be implemented in all government departments. 
4. 
The decision of  Joint Chief Staff Committee shall not apply to:- 
(a) 
Offices of Pakistan Foreign Service, who shall be exempted from 
the above as an exception. 
(b) 
Government servants on deputation/employment abroad with 
international organizations/foreign governments where no funds of 
Government Pakistan are involved. 
[Authority:- Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No.5/1/2000-T.IV, dated 23-8-2000] 
 
 

  Page - 600                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
21.4 
Size of Family Members of Serving  
Personnel Selected For Secondment 
Abroad 
In continuation of  Establishment Division‘s O.M. of even number dated August 
23, 2000  on the above noted subject, it is stated that  the competent authority has been 
pleased to approve the following amendment in the aforementioned O.M.:- 
For: 
No part families will be permitted for secondment abroad. 
Read: 
No part families will be permitted for secondment abroad, except 
families having non-dependent children i.e. boys enrolled/ serving in 
the armed forces or pensionable government jobs and girls married and 
living with their husbands 
[Authority:- Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.5/1/2000-T.IV, dated 4-11-2000] 
 
21.5 
Size of Family Members for  
Secondment Abroad 
In continuation of this Division‘s O.M. of even number dated 23-8-2000 and 04-
11-2000 on the above subject, it is stated that the competent authority  has been pleased  
to approve the following:— 
(a) 
The family of the official who proceeds abroad single, will be allowed to 
retain government  accommodation in Pakistan during  the period of  
secondment  abroad subject to the condition that the  official will  not have 
accommodation on government expense  at two stations  i.e. in Pakistan as 
well as outside Pakistan; and  
(b) 
There is no objection to the members of the families proceeding  abroad at 
their own expense. However, no part families will  be permitted. 
2.   
These instructions may please be circulated for strict compliance. 
[Authority:- Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.5/1/2000-T.IV(Z), dated 27-8-2001] 
21.6 
Deputation Abroad Beyond Five Years 
and Placement in Static List 
 
Refer to the Establishment Division O.M. No. 10(3)/81 CP.I, dated 25th June, 
1984 regarding policy governing civil servants on deputation abroad. 
 
2.  
Till recently, government servants on deputation to international 
organizations and foreign governments were required to come back after spending five 
years of their deputation abroad.  This policy has been reviewed and, in accordance with 
para 4 of the O.M. referred to above, government servants can stay abroad beyond 5 
years under certain conditions.  The relevant provision of the policy is reproduced 
below:— 
 
―Government may allow an officer to continue against his assignment 
abroad even after the expiry of 5 years on the request of the officer or 
his employer. However, in all such cases, the officer‘s name will be 
removed from the existing Seniority List and placed on a separate 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 601 
 
 
Static List with no claim to promotion or to seniority over any junior 
who may be promoted during this period.  An officer‘s name would be 
brought back on the Seniority List only after he resumes duty on return.  
In such cases also, the officer must earn a confidential report for one 
full year before he is considered for promotion.  If approved for 
promotion, he will not regain his seniority.  He will be assigned 
seniority in the higher post only from the date he assumes its charge‖. 
 
3.  
It is, therefore, requested that cases of government servants, who wish to 
stay abroad beyond five years, may kindly be processed accordingly. 
[Authority.- Establishment Secretary‘s D.O. letter No.1/40/83-T.IV, dated 24-3-1985]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  Page - 602                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
IX. 
SERVICE IN INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES 
 
22.1 
Publicity of Vacancies in International Agencies, 
 
 
Foreign Governments and Private Organizations 
 
With reference to the Establishment Division Office Memorandum of even 
number dated 25-6-1984, it is stated that some civil servants serving abroad on deputation 
with various international agencies, foreign governments or private organizations have 
complained that sufficient publicity has not been given to the policy contained in 
Establishment Division Office Memorandum under reference. 
 
2.  
All Ministries/Divisions were requested vide para 5 of the Establishment 
Division‘s Office Memorandum dated 25-6-1984 to bring the instructions on the subject 
to the notice of civil servants already serving on deputation abroad and those allowed to 
proceed on deputation in future.  This may please be ensured. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No.10(3)/81-CP.I(A). dated 19-5-1985]. 
 
22.2 
Deputation of Defence Officers  
in Civil : Requisition by Name 
Reference the instructions regarding above subject issued by the Defence 
Division vide their U.O.No.F.2/84/D-24/88, dated 23.12.2000 and F.2/33/D-24(C-IV)/88, 
dated 24.10.88. Despite the above instructions there has been an increasing tendency of 
requisitioning services of officers of the armed forces by name. Ministries/Divisions are, 
therefore, requested that in future services of armed forces officers in civil departments 
shall not be requisitioned by name. Further, for processing of cases of such nature in 
future, the following guidelines shall be observed:- 
(i) 
When services of personnel of the armed forces are required for posting 
against any civil post, the proposal to this effect shall be forwarded by the 
respective Ministry/Division to the Ministry of Defence indicating the post 
with BPS/pay and allowances job description and the period for which the 
services are required (copy of the same shall also be forwarded to the COS 
to the Chief Executive for information). 
(ii) 
Defence Division, in consultation, with the concerned  Services HQ and  
with the approval of the  COAS shall forward the  panel of officers  of 
armed forces to the Ministry/Division concerned who will make  selection 
of  the most suitable  officers and  obtain approval of the  competent 
authority for secondment of  the  officer with the civil departments. 
(iii) On receipt of confirmation/approval from the borrowing Ministry/ 
Division. Defence Division will convey the same to the Services HQ 
concerned to allow the officers to join the respective organization. 
[Authority:- Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No.1/99/2000-CP-6, dated 10-01-2001] 
 
                                                          
 In the present context, it would imply COS to the President; the Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister. 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 603 
 
 
22.3 Civil Servants (Service in International  
 
Organizations) Rules,2016 
1. 
Short title, application and commencement.—(1) These rules may be 
called the Civil servants (Service in International Organizations) Rules,2016. 
(2) 
They shall apply to the civil servants seeking employment on reserved and 
specific posts and open posts and deputation in any international organization including 
an international non-governmental organization, international financial institution and 
foreign donor agency whether or not on behalf of Pakistan or with prior permission of the 
Federal Government.  
(3) They shall come into force at once.  
 
2. 
Definitions.— (1) In these rules, unless there is anything repugnant in the 
subject or context,— 
(a) 
―Act‖ means the Civil Servants Act,1973 (LXXI of 1973); 
(b) 
―appellate authority‖ means the authority next above the competent 
authority; 
(c) 
―appointing authority‖ means the authority specified in rule 6 of the Civil 
Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules,1973 and other 
applicable rules under the Act; 
(d) 
―Board‖ means Special Selection Board constituted under rule 6; 
(e) 
―cadre‖ means the strength of a Service or Group as part of Service or 
Group sanctioned as separate unit and includes ex-cadre posts; 
(f) 
―competent authority‖ means the authority competent to approve 
deputation under these rules; 
(g) 
―deputation‖ means assignment of a civil servant to a post with prior 
approval of the competent authority, in an international organization; 
(h) 
―Division‖ shall have the same meaning as assigned to it under the Rules 
of Business,1973; 
(i) 
―foreign government‖ means a Government other than Government of 
Pakistan; 
(j) 
―international organization‖ means an international governmental 
organization or organization working in more than one country including 
United Nations and its specialized agencies, development agencies of 
other countries, international non-governmental organizations and 
companies, foreign government organizations hiring functionaries 
irrespective of their nationality excepting defence, security and 
intelligence related foreign governmental organization; 
(k) 
―open post‖ means a post, open to all eligible competing candidates 
including civil servants not being a post reserved for nomination by the 

  Page - 604                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
Federal Government; 
(l) 
―reserved and specific post‖ means a post where occupancy is limited to 
Pakistan‘s officials or alternate between Pakistan and other countries on 
their turn; 
(m) 
―Rules‖ means rules made under the Act; 
(n) 
―Schedule‖ means a schedule to these rules; 
(o) 
―Secretary‖ shall have the same meaning as assigned to it under the Rules 
of Business,1973; 
(p) 
―static list‖ means a list of officers on deputation beyond five years 
approved under the Rules; 
(q) 
―surety bond‖ means an undertaking executed by a government servant 
on the form specified under these rules; 
(r) 
―tenure‖ means time period specified for deputation including approved 
extension under these rules; and 
(s) 
―UN specialized agencies‖ mean the agencies of United Nations 
Organization (UNO) included in the Schedule.  
 
(2) 
All other words and expressions used, but not defined herein, shall have 
the same meanings as are assigned to them in the Act and the Rules.   
 
3. 
Bar to seek employment in international organizations.— A civil 
servant shall not approach an international organization for seeking employment therein 
without approval of the Federal Government or, as the case may be, the competent 
authority.  
 
4. 
Selection criteria for reserved and specific posts (1) For the purpose of 
short listing and selecting civil servants seeking employment on reserved and specific 
posts, the following procedure shall be adopted, namely:— 
(a) 
for taking up an assignment in an international organization, a civil servant 
should have completed five years of service in his cadre.  
(b) 
All Pakistan specific foreign posts that are vacant and available or are 
likely to become vacant, shall be circulated amongst all eligible officers of 
the identified services, cadres and occupational groups, clearly specifying 
eligibility criteria in terms of educational qualifications, experience, age, 
grade and so forth; 
(c) 
There shall be a precondition of passing a written qualifying test, but the 
test shall be organized by the concerned Ministry through a well reputed 
testing agency and institution hired through open competitive process; 
(d) 
The minimum qualifying score in the written test shall be set at sixty 
percent; 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 605 
 
 
(e) 
Eighty percent weightage shall be given to the written test scores and 
twenty percent weightage to the interview scores; and 
(f) 
No minimum passing marks shall be fixed for the interview and no 
candidate shall be deemed to have failed in the selection process merely 
on the basis of his performance in the interview: 
 
Provided that and officer nominated against a post of sensitive or 
strategic importance as set out in the schedule shall be selected in a 
transparent manner to be determined by the competent authority. 
 
5. 
Method of selection on open posts.— (1) Subject to rule3, a civil 
servant may apply against open post in an international organization. 
 
(2) 
Case of a civil servant, who is selected by any international organization 
pursuant to application under sub-rule (1), shall be placed before the Board for 
recommendation before sending it to the competent authority. The Board may call the 
incumbent civil servant for interview or personal appearance. 
 
6. 
Composition of the Board.— (1) The following shall be members of the 
Special Selection Board, namely:- 
a. 
Secretary, Cabinet Division  
 
 
Chairman 
b. 
Secretary, Establishment Division 
 
 
Member 
c. 
Secretary, Economic Affairs Division  
 
Member 
d. 
Secretary, Foreign Affairs Division   
 
Member 
e. 
Joint Secretary (Training), Establishment Division 
Member-cum- 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Secretary 
 
(2) 
Secretary, head of the organization or, as the case may be, representative 
of concerned department not below BS-21 may be invited as co-opted member of the 
Board.  
 
(3) 
The Secretary of the Board shall convene meeting of the Board, with the 
approval of the Chairman. The Board shall consider the offer of appointment and submit 
its recommendations to the competent authority.  
 
7. 
Competent authority.— (1) The person specified in column (3) of the 
Table below shall be the competent authority to approve the cases of deputation to 
international organization in respect of civil servants specified in column (2) of the Table, 
namely:— 
S.No. 
Civil Servants in 
Competent authority 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
1 
BS-20 and above 
Prime Minister 
2 
BS-17 to 19 
Secretary Establishment Division 
3 
BS-1 to 16 
Secretary of the Minister or Division concerned  

  Page - 606                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
 
(2) 
The competent authority may approve the recommendations with or 
without stipulations deemed expedient including the period of deputation and where 
applicable extension thereof.  
 
(3) 
The competent authority may, for reasons to be recorded, refer back a case 
or cases for reconsideration by the Board.  
 
(4) 
Where a post for which recommendations have been, or being, formulated 
is abolished or is withdrawn from circulation for any reason or on any ground, the 
recommendations of the Board shall be deemed to have lapsed. 
 
8. 
Ineligibility.— A civil servant shall not be eligible to apply for permission 
under these Rules, who – 
 
(a) 
is held guilty of misconduct or inefficiency under the Government Servants 
(Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 1973 or convicted of an offense of moral 
turpitude; and 
 
(b) 
has not completed three years of service in his cadre after returning from 
immediately preceding deputation in international organization. 
 
9. 
Tenure of deputation.— (1) The deputation shall be made initially for a 
period equal to the approved tenure of appointment offered by the borrowing international 
organization. 
 
(2) 
In case where the period of deputation is not specified, the period shall be 
three years extendable to maximum period of two years with the approval of competent 
authority. 
 
(3) 
In case of retention of a civil servant after expiry of maximum period of 
five years he shall be placed static list.  
 
(4) 
Surety bond shall be executed by the concerned civil servant, that he shall 
revert to the parent department on completion of the approved tenure of deputation and in 
case of default he shall render himself liable to be proceeded against for misconduct under 
the Government Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 1973. 
 
10. 
Repeal.— Any instructions and the policy instructions relating to posting 
and deputation of a civil servant on foreign assignment are hereby repealed and such repeal 
shall not in any manner affect operation of orders of posting and deputation of civil servants 
issued before commencement of these rules. 
                                                          
 Now Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules,2020. 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 607 
 
 
SCHEDULE 
[see rules 2 and 4] 
 
[1.] The International Organizations of sensitive and strategic importance 
includes World Bank, International Monitory Fund (IMF), Asian Development Bank 
(ADB), Islamic Development Bank(IDB), Department for International Development 
(DFID), US-AID, Organization of Islamic Countries (OIC), Economic Cooperation 
Organization (ECO), International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), World Trade 
Organization (WTO), International Court of Justice (ICJ), SAARC Secretariat, 
Commonwealth Secretariat, World Health Organization (WHO), International Labour 
Organization (ILO), Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries(OPEC) and 
International Human Rights Commission (IHRC). 
 
*[2. 
Any post, other than an open post, in an International Organization that has 
been offered to Pakistan under any bilateral or multilateral arrangement and has been 
notified by Establishment Division with the approval of the Prime Minister.]  
 
On Stamp Paper of Rs.100/- 
Surety Bond 
[see rules 2 and 9] 
 
I ______________________________ S/O_________________________ an 
officer of ____________________________  solemnly declare that I have been offered a 
position of __________________________________________________________ in the 
__________________ and I shall revert to my parent government/department on the 
completion of my approved tenure of deputation/posting. In case of default I shall render 
myself liable to disciplinary action under the Government Servants (Efficiency and 
Discipline) 
Rules,1973 
for 
misconduct 
including 
recovery 
of 
any 
financial 
liability/recovery thereof.   
___________________ 
Name and Designation  
CNIC No.___________ 
Witness No.(1) _________________ 
Name   
 _________________ 
CNIC No. 
 _________________ 
Witness No.(2) _________________ 
Name   
 _________________ 
CNIC No. 
 _________________ 
                                                          
 Re-numbered and added vide Establishment Division S.R.O 1198(I)/2020 vide Notification No. F.No. 
3/7/2016-R-2 dated 05-11-2020. 
 Now Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules,2020.  

  Page - 608                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-6                      
 
 
22.4 
Deployment of Police Personnel in UN Missions 
 
Reference Estab. Div. OM No. 5/2/2001-T-TV, dated 28th January, 2002 on the 
above subject.  Finance Division is of the view that the deployment of police personnel in 
UN Missions cannot be considered as deputation to foreign service unless they pay these 
personnel, the salary, allowances and other facilities. Deployment of personnel in UN 
Missions means that the person will go out of the cadre. The cadre means under FR 9(4) 
the strength of a service or a part of a service sanctioned as a separate unit. According to  
FR 9(7), foreign service means the service in which the government servant receives his 
substantive pay with the sanction of the Government from any source other than the 
revenue of the Governor General or of a province etc. ―If we consider these police 
officials on foreign service, they cannot be paid salary and other facilities from the 
revenues of the Government of Pakistan. Moreover, UN is allowing them subsistence 
grant. When the subsistence grant is allowed to a government servant by a foreign 
mission, he cannot be paid the salary from revenues of Government of Pakistan. The 
provision of FR-9(27) is as under: 
―Subsistence grant means a monthly grant made to a Government servant 
who is not in receipt of pay or leave salary‖. 
 
2.  
In view of this provision in the financial rules, the police officials sent to 
serve the UN Missions cannot claim or cannot be paid the salary from the revenues of 
Government of Pakistan, in this case the concerned Police Department. They can claim 
pay from the Government of Pakistan or Police Department concerned when they serve 
under the Government of Pakistan. The rule position has been clarified under FR-9(28) as 
under: 
―The substantive pay means the pay other than special pay, personal pay 
or emoluments classed by pay by the Governor General under rule 9(21) 
(a) (iii) to which a Government servant is entitled on account of a post to 
which he has been appointed substantively or by reasons of his 
substantive position in a cadre‖. 
 
When a police personnel is serving in the UN Mission, he is not serving against 
his substantive post or substantive post or substantive position in a cadre. He cannot be 
paid pay from the general revenue of Government of Pakistan. 
 
3.  
From the provisions of above rules, it is clear that police personnel sent to 
serve the UN Missions cannot claim pay from Government of Pakistan as they did not 
serve the Government of Pakistan as they did not serve the Government of Pakistan or in 
their cadre. Moreover, since they will be in receipt of subsistence grant or allowance they 
cannot be paid salary. Their period of duty in UN Mission will also not be counted for the 
purpose of pension unless they pay pension contribution. This period will also not count 
for the maintenance of leave account. They are also required to contribute towards GP 
Fund etc. However as a special compensation the government may allow the families of 
such police personnel to retain the government accommodation and medical facilities. 
                                                          
 President; Revenues of Government of Pakistan. 

   CHAPTER-6                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 609 
 
 
 
4.   
In view of above, Establishment Division is requested to reconsider the 
proposed terms and conditions of police personnel so as to bring these in line with the 
rules. 
5.   
This issues, with the approval of the competent authority. 
[Authority:- Finance Div.‘s OM No. F.3(7)-R-10/94, dated 7th March, 2002]. 
_________________ 

CHAPTER 7   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CAREER PLANNING, PROMOTION  
& TRAINING  
(611-612) 

  CHAPTER-7                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                    Page - 613 
 
CHAPTER 7 
 
CAREER PLANNING, PROMOTION & TRAINING  
 
Sl. 
No(s). 
Chapter Contents 
Page 
 No(s). 
 
I. CAREER PLANNING 
 
 
1.1 
Preparation of Seniority Lists BPS Wise ..................................................
617-619 
 
1.2 
Seniority of Officers and Occupational Groups After Administrative 
Reforms .........................................................................................................
619-620 
 
1.3 
Civil Servants (Seniority) Rules, 1993 ..........................................................
620-622 
 
1.4 
Permanent Absorption of Civil Servants of the Devolved Ministries/ 
Divisions/Departments/Organizations ..........................................................
622-624 
 
1.5 
Quota Consideration Regarding Permanent Absorption of Civil Servants 
of the Devolved Ministries/Divisions/ Departments/ Organizations ............
624 
 
1.6 
Operational Guidelines for the Administration of Surplus Pool..............
625-626 
 
1.7 
Modified Guidelines for Disposal of Federal Government Employees 
in the Surplus Pool  .................................................................................
626-627 
 
1.8 
Merger of the Cadres of Urdu and English Typist/ Stenotypist/ 
Stenographer for Purposes of Seniority, Promotion etc. .............................
627-628 
 
II. 
PROMOTION 
 
 
2.1  
Revision of Nominations for NMC,NS&WC,SMC and MCMC ...........
629 
 
2.2 
Equivalence of PER Grading in Defence and Civilian Organizations .........
629 
 
2.3 
Civil Servants (Promotion to the Post of Secretary, BS-22 and 
Equivalent) Rules, 2010 ..........................................................................
630-632 
 
2.4 
Issuance of Revised PER Forms ...................................................................
633 
 
2.5 
Clarification Regarding Quantification of Part PERs in Case of 
Incomplete Record ..................................................................................
633-636 
3 
Civil Servants Promotion (BPS-18 to BPS-21) Rules,2019 ...........................
636-667 
 
4.1 
Other Posts in the Federal Secretariat, Attached Departments and Subordin
668 
 
4.2 
Appointment of Council Assistant ................................................................
668-669 
5 
General Instructions Regarding Promotions ................................................
669-671 
 
6.1 
Minimum Length of Service for Eligibility for Promotion to Posts in 
Various BPS .................................................................................................
671-672 
 
6.2 
Counting of Ad-Hoc Service for the Purpose of Promotion .........................
673 
 
6.3 
Counting of Service Rendered Against Higher Post Under Section 10 
of the Civil Servants Act, 1973 ...............................................................
673-674 
 
6.4 
Length of Service for Promotion from BPS-16 to BPS-18 Where 
There is No Intermediate Post in BPS-17 ...............................................
674 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
 Re-designated as Assistant Private Secretary. 

  Page - 614                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                  CHAPTER-7                               
 
Sl. 
No(s). 
Chapter Contents 
Page 
 No(s). 
 
6.5 
Possession of Prescribed Minimum Length of Service Does Not Confer 
a Right to Promotion Over Senior Persons ...................................................
674 
 
6.6 
Grant of BPS-17 to the Superintendent (BPS-16) in the Federal 
Government Ministries/Divisions/Attached Departments/Sub-ordinate 
Offices ...........................................................................................................
674-675 
 
7.1 
Setting-Up of the Departmental Promotion Committees for 
Promotion to Posts Upto and Including BPS 18 ......................................
675 
 
7.2 
Composition of Departmental Promotion/Selection Committees ...........
676 
 
7.3 
Post in BPS 18 Which Carry Special Pay .....................................................
676 
 
7.4 
DPC Not Competent to Recommend Demotion ...........................................
676-677 
 
7.5 
Names of the Selected Persons to be Arranged in the Order of Seniority ..........
677 
 
7.6 
DPC Can Interview Candidates ....................................................................
677 
 
7.7 
Minutes of the DPC.......................................................................................
677 
 
7.8 
Composition of Departmental Selection Board (DSB) for Promotion 
of Federal Civil Servants from BS-18 to BS-19 ......................................
677-678 
 
7.9 
Proposals for Central Selection Board – Prescribed Forms and Check 
List (March, 1990) ........................................................................................
678-680 
 
7.10 Proposal for Central Selection Board – Revised Forms (March,1999) ...........
681-690 
 
7.11 Guidelines for Submission of Proposals for Consideration of Central 
Selection Board (CSB) ..................................................................................
691 
 
7.12 Procedure for Referring Cases to the Selection Board ..................................
691-692 
 
7.13 Consideration of Cases by Central Selection Board – Furnishing of Full 
Particulars of Candidates for Promotion .......................................................
692 
 
7.14 Re-appointment to Posts Within the Purview of Selection Board ................
692 
 
7.15 Short-Term Appointments and Direct Appointments to Higher 
Secretariat Posts-under the Present Orders ...................................................
692-693 
 
7.16 Convention Regarding Acceptance of Recommendations of the 
Selection Board .............................................................................................
693-694 
 
7.17 Meetings of the Central Selection Board ......................................................
694 
 
8.1 
Promotion/Direct Recruitment Quota ......................................................
694 
 
8.2 
Filling-up of Vacancies – Distribution According to Quota for 
Promotion, Transfer and Direct Recruitment ................................................
695 
 
8.3 
Maintenance 
of 
Roster 
for 
Application 
of 
Promotion/Initial 
Appointment Quota .......................................................................................
695-696 
 
8.4 
Eligibility of Superintendent (BS-17) to  Participate in Section Officers 
Promotional Examination .............................................................................
696 
 
9.1 
Proforma Promotions ................................................................................
696-697 
 
9.2 
Consideration for Promotion of a Person on Transfer to Another Office ..........
697 
 
9.3 
Proforma Promotions – Review of Cases ....................................................
697-698 
 
9.4 
Reversion of Deputationists to Parent Departments .....................................
698-699 
 
 
 
 
9.5 
Revised Guidelines for the FR-17(I) Committee/High Level Committee 
to Consider the Cases of Proforma Promotion on the Basis of Antedated 
Seniority ........................................................................................................
699-702 

  CHAPTER-7                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                    Page - 615 
 
Sl. 
No(s). 
Chapter Contents 
Page 
 No(s). 
 
9.6 
Promotion on Temporary/Regular Basis ................................................
702-703 
 
9.7 
Promotion of an Officer/Official During LPR .............................................
703 
 
9.8 
Bar against Promotion of Ad-Hoc Appointees ............................................
703 
 
III. TRAINING 
 
A. NATIONAL SCHOOL OF PUBLIC POLICY RULES 
10 
National School of Public Policy Rules,2017 .......................................................
704-708 
B. 
TRAINING POLICY  
 
11.1 Promotion Related Capacity Building of Civil Servants in BPS 17 to 
BPS 19 of Various Occupational Groups/ Services ................................
708-720 
 
11.2 Criteria for Nomination of Officers to National Management College/ 
National Institute of Management (NIMs)  
721-723 
 
11.3 Nomination of Officers of Autonomous/Semi-Autonomous Bodies 
Equivalent to BS-18,BS-19 & BS-20 for MCMC, SMC & NMC ..............
724 
 
11.4 Annual Medical Examination Reports-Fitness of a Civil Servant for 
Posting, Training and Retention in Service .............................................
724 
 
IV. 
MISCELLANEOUS INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
12.1 Grant of BS-21 and BS-22 to Technical/Professional Officers on Accou 725-726 
 
12.2 Clarification Regarding Revision of policy for Grant of BS-21 and BS-
22 to Technical and Professional officers on the basis of Meritorious 
Services .........................................................................................................
726-727 
 
12.3 Grant of BS-21 to Technical and Professional Officers on Account of 
Meritorious Service .......................................................................................
727-732 
13 
 
Knowledge of Islamic/Pakistan Studies ....................................................
732-733 
14 
 
Declining Promotion to Evade Transfer to an Unattractive 
Station 
733 
15 
 
Discontinuation of Use of the Term “Competent Authority” .................
734 
 
_____________________________ 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 617 
 
 
CHAPTER 7 
CAREER PLANNING, PROMOTION & TRAINING  
I. CAREER PLANNING 
 
1.1 
Preparation of Seniority Lists BPS Wise 
 
 According to sub-section (1) of section 8 of the Civil Servants Act, 1973, seniority 
lists of all persons employed under the Federal Government are required to be prepared.  After 
promulgation of the All-Pakistan Services (Change in Nomenclature) Rules, 1973, and the 
Civil Servants (Change in Nomenclature of Services and Abolition of Classes) Rules, 1973, 
the former regularly constituted Services ceased to exist. Seniority lists of all officers 
employed under the Federal Government including officers belonging to the former regularly 
constituted Services, should, therefore be re-drawn grade-wise. In the case of appointments 
made by promotion, seniority in a particular grade would be determined according to sub-
section (4), of section 8 of the Civil Servants Act, 1973, namely, according to the date of 
regular appointment to a post in that  grade, subject to the proviso that civil servants selected 
for promotion to a higher grade in one batch shall, on their promotion, retain their inter-se-
seniority in the lower grade unless superseded.  As for seniority between departmental 
promotees and direct recruits in grades where posts are filled both by promotion and direct 
recruitment, the rule already prescribed in the general principles of seniority in Establishment 
Division O.M. No. 1/16/69-D.II, dated 31st December, 1970 shall continue to be followed.  
According to these rules officers promoted to a higher grade in a continuous arrangement and 
as a regular measure in a particular year shall, as a class, be senior to those appointed by direct 
recruitment in the same year. 
 
2. 
The Establishment Division have already issued gradation lists in respect of  
BPS 18 and above of the **All-Pakistan Unified Grades.  As for Federal Unified Grades, the 
Ministries/Divisions are requested to prepare gradation lists for each occupational group 
under their administrative control. The names of the functional groups and the Ministry/ 
Division administratively concerned with them are:— 
 
 
                                                          
 Note.- The instructions contained in this O.M. should be read alongwith the modified instructions contained in 
O.M. dated 1-9-1975. 
**All Pakistan Services (Change in Nomenclature) Rules, 1973, notified vide SRO 1307(I)/73 dated 14-09-
1973, have been repealed vide SRO 89(I)/2014 dated 14-02-2014, whereby all notifications and instructions 
issued on the subject from time to time were mutatis mutandis amended. 

Page - 618                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
Name of the Occupational 
Group 
Name of the Former Service 
Ministry/Division 
concerned 
1.* Foreign Service of Pakistan 
Foreign Affairs Group-Comprises posts 
under the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 
Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs 
2.** Pakistan Audit and Accounts 
Service  
Accounts Group-Comprises the former 
PAAS/PMAS & PRAS. 
Auditor General/ 
Ministry of Finance. 
3. Inland Revenue Service 
Income Tax Group 
Ministry of Finance 
1. Pakistan Customs Service 
Pakistan Customs and Excise Service 
Ministry of Finance 
5. Commerce and Trade Group 
Trade Service of Pakistan 
Ministry of Commerce 
6. Information Group. 
Information Service of Pakistan 
Ministry of Information 
and Media Development 
7. Secretariat Group@ 
-- 
Establishment Division 
8. Postal Group 
-- 
Ministry of 
Communications 
9. Military Lands and Cantonment 
 
Group 
Pakistan Military Lands and 
Cantonments Service. 
Ministry of Defence 
10. Railway (Commercial and  
      Transportation) Group 
Pakistan Railway Service 
Railways Division 
11. Pakistan Administrative  
      Service (PAS) 
District Management Group 
Establishment Division 
12.@@ Police Service of Pakistan 
Police Group 
Establishment Division 
13. Office Management Group   
      (OMG) 
Central Secretariat Service 
Establishment Division 
14. Economists and Planners    
      Group 
-- 
Planning & Development 
Division 
 
 
A proforma in which the gradation list should be prepared is enclosed (Annex). 
Names of other occupational groups will be notified later. 
 
3. 
The first issue of the gradation list should be marked ―provisional‖. It should 
be circulated to the officers concerned and objections or representations invited.  Mistakes 
which may be brought to notice may be rectified by the Ministries and Divisions and any 
general point raised in the representations may be examined and disposed of in consultation 
with the Establishment Division. Thereafter, the gradation list will be issued as final. 
 
4. 
 A copy of the provisional list may be sent to the Establishment Division also 
for record. Representations should be disposed of expeditiously and the gradation lists 
finalised as early as possible. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.1/9/74-ARC,dated 12-9-1974]. 
                                                          
* ―Foreign Affairs Group‖ renamed as Foreign Services of Pakistan vide Notification No. SRO 936(1)/83 dated 
29.9.1983. 
** ―Accounts Group‖ renamed as Pakistan Audit & Accounts Service w.e.f. 10th December, 2002 vide Estab. 
Div. OM No.1/17/92-CPII. 
―Income Tax Group‖ renamed as Inland Revenue Service vide Estt. Div.‘s O.M.6/2/2009-CP-II dated 12-09-2009. 
@ Secretariat Group composed of officers of the former CSP, DMG who opted for this Group; officers of OMG 
on promotion to the posts of Deputy Secretary and officers of other services/ groups who opted for or were 
inducted in Secretariat Group. 
@@ Renamed as Police Services of Pakistan vide Estt. Div.‘s SRO No. 1033(I)/85, dated 23.10.1985 as 
amended upto 9.10.1998 vide Estt. Div. Notification No. SRO 1034(1)/98, dated 9.10.1998. 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 619 
 
 
(ANNEX) 
GRADATION LIST OF FEDERAL UNIFIED GRADES 
Name of the Occupational Group……….............................................. Grade.................. 
 
Sl. No. 
Name and 
Desig. 
Date of 
Birth 
Date of entry 
in Govt. 
Service 
Date of entry 
in Grade-17 
Date of regular 
appointment to 
present grade. 
Remarks 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note.  
(1) 
Date of regular appointment to present grade (BPS) should be the date of 
assumption of actual charge in the Grade after issue of promotion/appoint-
ment orders by the competent authority. 
 
(2) 
In the remarks column entries such as serving on deputation to (specify the 
organisation) with effect from ------ should be made. 
 
(3) 
Where seniority has been assigned from a date other than the date of regular 
appointment, the reason for this may be given in the remarks column. 
1.2 
Seniority of Officers and  
Occupational Groups After  
Administrative Reforms 
 
In the Establishment Division Office Memorandum No. 1/9/74-ARC, dated the 
12th September, 1974 the Ministries and Divisions were requested to prepare seniority 
lists grade-wise. It was provided that in the case of appointments made by promotion, 
seniority in a particular grade should be determined according to sub-section (4) of 
section 8 of the Civil Servants Act, 1973, namely from the date of regular appointment to 
a post in a grade. 
 
2.  
A number of references have been received in the Establishment Division 
enquiring whether the seniorities in various grades which had already been established 
according to the previous rules on the subject differently from the principle of date of 
regular appointment to a grade could not be modified in accordance with the provisions 
of sub-section (4) of section 8 of the Civil Servants Act, 1973.  The matter has been 
examined in consultation with the Law Division.  The position is that consequent upon 
the Administrative Reforms, certain cadres have been transformed into occupational 
groups but the composition of the cadres comprising these groups has remained intact.  
Examples are; the Income Tax Group, the Customs and Excise Group, the Military 
Lands and Cantonments Group etc. However, in the case of certain other groups for 
example the Accounts Group and the Secretariat Group - a number of cadres have been 
                                                          
 Now renamed as ―Inland Revenue Service‖ vide Estt. Div.‘s O.M.6/2/2009-CP-II dated 12-09-2009. 
 Renamed as ―Pakistan Customs Service‖ vide ibid.  
 Renamed as Pakistan Audit & Accounts Service w.e.f. 10th December, 2002 vide Estt. Div.‘s OM 
No.1/17/92-CPII, dated 10th December, 2002. 

Page - 620                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
amalgamated to form a new group or cadre. In the case of groups where the cadre has not 
been amalgamated with any other cadre, the seniority in different grades as determined 
under the previous rules before the promulgation of the Civil Servants Ordinance, 1973 
(15-8-1973) shall not be disturbed.  However, seniority of persons promoted to higher 
grades after 15-8-1973 shall be determined strictly in accordance with the provisions of 
sub-section (4) of section 8 of the Civil Servants Act, 1973. 
 
3. 
In regard to occupational groups which have been formed by 
amalgamating more than one cadre, no such protection of seniority is either permissible 
or practicable.  The old cadres having ceased to exist, the seniorities in the newly formed 
groups have to be determined afresh and shall be fixed in accordance with the date of 
regular appointment to posts in the respective grades. 
 
4. The instructions issued in the Establishment Division Office Memorandum No. 
1/9/74-ARC, dated 12-9-1974 and the relevant provisions regarding seniority contained in 
the instructions about constitution of various occupational groups may be deemed to have 
been modified to the above extent. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M.No. 1/36/75-D.II, dated 1-9-1975]. 
 
1.3 
Civil Servants (Seniority)  
Rules, 1993 
 
In exercise of the powers conferred by section 25 of the Civil Servants Act, 
1973 (LXXI of 1973), read with section 8 thereof, the President is pleased to make the 
following rules, namely:– 
 
1. 
Short title, application and commencement.–(1) These rules may be 
called the Civil Servants (Seniority) Rules, 1993. 
 
(2)  They shall apply to all civil servants except those governed under:– 
(i) 
the Police Service of Pakistan (Composition, Cadre and Seniority) 
Rules, 1985; 
(ii) 
the Occupational Groups and Services (Probation, Training and 
Seniority) Rules, 1990; and 
(iii) the Establishment Div.‘s O.M. No.1/2/74-ARC, dated 23rd  January, 
1974, amended vide O.M. No.2/1/75-ARC, dated 3rd  March, 1976, 
and as amended from time to time. 
 
(3) 
They shall come into force at once. 
 
2.  
Seniority on initial appointment.–(1) Persons initially appointed on the 
recommendations of the selection authority through an earlier open advertisement shall 
rank senior to those appointed through a subsequent open advertisement. 
 
(2)  If two or more persons are recommended in open advertisement by the 
selection authority, their inter-se-seniority shall be determined in order of merit assigned 
by the selection authority. 
 
(3) 
If only one candidate is recommended in open advertisement by the 
selection authority, he shall count his seniority from:– 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 621 
 
 
(a) 
the date of recommendation by the selection authority, if he was already 
holding the same post on ad-hoc basis. 
(b) 
the date of his joining the post after being recommended by the selection 
authority if he was not already holding the same post. 
 
3. 
Seniority on promotion.–Seniority in a service, cadre or post to which a 
civil servant is promoted shall take effect from the date of regular promotion to that 
service, cadre or posts:– 
 
Provided that– 
(a) 
Civil servants selected for promotion to higher posts on an earlier date 
shall be senior to those selected for such promotion on a later date; 
(b) 
Civil servants selected for promotion to higher posts in one batch shall on 
their promotion to the higher post, retain their inter-se-seniority as in the 
lower post; [*] 
*[(ba) Inter-se-seniority of civil servants belonging to different occupational 
groups or services and selected for promotion to a post in a higher pay 
scale in one occupational group or service shall, on their promotion, be 
reckoned from the date of their regular appointment to the immediate 
lower pay scale in their respective occupational group or service, where 
such date is same, the person older in age shall rank senior: 
(bb) Civil servants of different occupational groups or services who opt for 
promotion in other occupational groups or services shall, on their 
promotion as such in one batch, be placed junior to the civil servants of 
the occupational group or service so opted; and]  
(c) 
Civil servants eligible for promotion who could not be considered for 
promotion in the original reference in circumstances beyond their control 
or whose case was deferred while their juniors were promoted to the 
higher post, shall, on promotion, without supersession, take their seniority 
with the original batch. 
 
4. 
Seniority on appointment by transfer.–Seniority in service, cadre or 
post to which a civil servant is appointed by transfer shall take effect from the date of 
regular appointment to the service, cadre or post; 
 
Provided that– 
(a) 
persons belonging to the same service, cadre or post selected for 
appointment by transfer to a service, cadre or post in one batch shall, on 
their appointment, take inter-se-seniority in the order of their date of 
regular appointment in their previous service, cadre or post; and  
(b) 
persons belonging to different services, cadre or posts selected for 
appointment by transfer in one batch shall take their inter-se- seniority in 
the order of the date of their regular appointment to the post which they 
                                                          
 Omitted & added vide S.R.O No. 1078(I)/2016 dated 22-11-2016. 

Page - 622                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
were holding before such appointment and, where such date is the same, 
the person older in age shall rank senior. 
 
[4A. In the event of merger [or devolution] of Ministries, Divisions, Attached 
Departments or Sub-ordinate Offices, the inter-se-seniority of civil servants, other than 
those belonging to regularly constituted Occupational Groups and Services, shall be 
determined in accordance with the date of regular appointment to a cadre or post]. 
 
5. 
Seniority of officers of the Armed Forces on induction in civil posts.–
Officers of the Armed Forces of Pakistan who are inducted in a civil service, cadre or 
post in accordance with the Government orders and instructions shall take seniority in 
that service, cadre or post from the date of such induction: 
 
Provided that the officers inducted in one batch shall, on induction, retain their 
inter se seniority as in the Armed Forces of Pakistan. 
 
6. 
Inter-se-seniority of civil servants appointed in the same calendar 
year.–Civil servants appointed by promotion, transfer, or initial appointment to a service, 
cadre, or post shall take seniority from the date of their regular appointment to that 
service, cadre or post:  
 
 
Provided that the provisions of this rule shall not in any manner affect or 
impair the right of existing incumbents.   
 
7. 
Repeal and savings.–The General Principles of seniority circulated vide 
Establishment Division‘s O.M.No.1/16/ 69-D.II, dated the 31st December, 1970@, and all 
other existing rules, orders and instructions relating to seniority except– 
(i)  
the Police Service of Pakistan (Composition, Cadre and Seniority) Rules, 
1985; 
(ii)  the Occupational Groups and Services (Probation, Training and Seniority) 
Rules, 1990; and 
(iii)  the Establishment Division‘s O.M.No.1/2/74-ARC dated 23rd January, 
1974, amended vide O.M. No. 2/1/75-ARC, dated the 3rd March, 1976  and 
as amended from time to time ;are hereby repealed. 
[Authority.– Estab. Div.‘s S.R.O. 163(I)/93, dated 28-2-1993]. 
1.4 
Permanent Absorption of Civil Servants of the Devolved 
Ministries/Divisions/ Departments/Organizations 
 
Refer to the points raised by the different Ministries/Divisions/Departments/ 
Organizations regarding the absorption of the employees of the devolved Ministries/ 
Divisions/ Departments/Organizations after promulgation of the Ordinance (Ordinance No. 
V) of 2013 and to clarify as under:— 
                                                          
 Added vide Estt. Div.‘s Notification SRO No. 01(I)/2002, dated 1-1-2002.  
 Inserted vide Estt. Div.‘s Notification S.R.O No. 437(I)/2018 dated 11-04-2018. 
 Subs. vide Estt. Div‘s SRO No. 572(I)/2009 dated 16-06-2009.  
@ Sl. No. 158, pp 224-229, Estacode, 1989. 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 623 
 
 
(i) 
Effective date of absorption:- Effective date of absorption may be the date 
of issue of order/ notification as the case may be.  
(ii) 
Fixation of Seniority:- Rule 3(1) of the Civil Servants (Appointment, 
Promotion & Transfer) Rules, 1973 provides the following three methods of 
appointment:— 
(a)  
By promotion 
(b) 
By transfer 
(c) 
By initial appointment 
 
Adjustment/absorption 
of 
Civil 
Servants 
of 
the 
devolved 
Ministries/ 
Divisions/Departments/Organizations may be treated as appointment by transfer and their 
seniority may be determined under rule 4 of Civil Servants (Seniority) Rules, 1993 which 
reads as under:- 
 
Rule-4 (Seniority on appointment by transfer):- Seniority in service, cadre or post to 
which a civil servant is appointed by transfer shall take effect from the date of regular 
appointment to the service, cadre or post; 
 
Provided that. 
(a) 
Person belonging to the same service, cadre or post selected for appointment 
by transfer to a service, cadre or post in one batch shall, on their appointment, 
take inter-se-seniority in the order of their date of regular appointment in 
their previous service, cadre or post; and  
(b) 
Persons belonging to different services, cadre or post selected for 
appointment by transfer in one batch shall take their inter-se-seniority in the 
order of the date of their regular appointment to the post which they were 
holding before such appointment and, where such date is the same, the 
person older in age shall rank senior.  
(c) 
Under rule 4-A of the Civil Servants (Seniority) Rules, 1993 in the event of 
merger of Ministries, Divisions, attached Departments or Subordinate 
Offices, the inter-se-seniority of  civil servants, other than regularly 
constituted occupational Groups & Service shall be determined in accordance 
with the date of regular to a Cadre or a post.  
(iii) Sanction Strength:- As regards the sanctioned strength, it is clarified that the 
employees transferred alongwith post and budget may be absorbed against 
the post transferred at the time of devolution to the Ministries/Divisions/ 
Departments concerned. However the employees transferred against the 
vacant posts at the time of devolution shall not add to their sanctioned 

Page - 624                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
strength. The Ministries/Divisions may work out their sanctioned strength 
after absorption of the employees of the devolved Ministries/ Divisions/ 
Departments and may submit the case for revision of their sanctioned 
strength to the Finance Division for concurrence through Management 
Services Wing of the Establishment Division.  
 
2. 
The absorption orders may be expedited in line with the orders of placement 
issued at the time of devolution of Ministries/Divisions/ Departments i.e against the vacant 
posts/alongwith post & budget  as the case may be. However, in case of any further query in 
the matter, it is requested to consult this Division after issuance of absorption orders.  
[Authority.– Estab. Div. M.S.Wing‘s OM No.F15(5)2011-MSW-IV dated 17th September, 2013]. 
1.5 
Quota Consideration Regarding Permanent  
Absorption of Civil Servants of the  
Devolved Ministries/Divisions/ 
Departments/Organizations 
 
Refer to Establishment Division O.M of even numbers dated 3-7-2013 and  
17-9-2013 on the above noted subject and to say that as per rules absorption/ appointment by 
transfer is made against the post reserved for direct recruitment. Thereby it has been decided 
that no absorption in respect of employees of devolved Ministries/ Divisions be made against 
the post of the Ministry/Division/Department/ Organization meant for promotion quota. 
Moreover, cases for absorption of the employees of devolved Ministries/ Divisions may be 
initiated with prior consultation of Management Service Wing, Establishment Division for 
revision of Notifications/ Office Orders to the extent of their transfer alongwith post & 
budget to absorb such employees of the devolved Ministries/Divisions against the transferred 
post to the concerned Ministry /Division. 
 [Authority:– Estt. Division M.S. Wing‘s O.M. No. 15(5)/2011-MSW-IV, dated 21-10-2013]. 
Clarification Regarding the Posts Transferred  
to Different Ministries/Divisions/Organizations 
alongwith the Incumbents and Later on  
Vacated Before Absorption of the Incumbents 
 
Refer to different queries raised by various Ministries/Divisions on the above noted 
subject and to say that the posts which were transferred to Ministries/Divisions/ 
Organizations alongwith the incumbents of the devolved Ministries/Divisions and later on 
vacated either due to retirement of the incumbents or some other reason, before permanent 
absorption of the incumbents, may be treated as a part of the general pool. These posts do not 
add in to the existing sanctioned strength or structure of the Ministries/Divisions/ 
Organizations. Final fate of such posts shall be decided upon completion of absorption process. 
[Authority:- Establishment Div. M.S. Wing‘s O.M.No.15(5)/2011-MSW-IV dated 17-02-2014.] 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 625 
 
 
1.6 
Operational Guidelines for the  
Administration of Surplus Pool 
 
 
In a presentation to the Chief Executive on ―Restructuring and Rightsizing of 
Federal Ministries/Divisions‖ held on 28.5.2001, it was, inter alia, decided that the 
officer-staff ratio (excluding drivers, despatch riders etc.) should be 1:3.2 for the year 
2001-2002 and 1:2.5 for the year 2002-2003, and thereafter it would be reviewed again. 
 
2. 
Each administrative Secretary may be made responsible for ensuring 
implementation of the above decision by making internal adjustment of staff. If any 
officer/staff becomes redundant to the requirement of the Ministries/ Divisions/Departments 
as a result of implementation of the above or any other decision, that may be enlisted with the 
surplus pool for adjustment elsewhere. As a result of implementation of the above said 
decisions, the number of surplus civil servants will increase manifold. 
 
3. 
In terms of Section 11(2) of the Civil Servants Act, 1973, the services of civil 
servants holding temporary and permanent posts can be terminated on abolition of such posts. 
However, on human considerations, government decided in 1993 to create a surplus pool 
under the charge of the Establishment Division. The civil servants declared surplus as a result 
of abolition of posts are enlisted in the surplus pool for absorption elsewhere. 
 
4. 
In order to speed-up the pace of absorption of surplus civil servants, 
following guidelines have been framed with approval of the competent authority, for 
effective administration of the surplus pool:– 
 
(i) 
The name of a civil servant, other than ad-hoc employees and persons 
appointed against leave and deputation vacancies, who may be rendered 
surplus as a result of reorganization or abolition of a Division/ 
Department/Organization or reduction in the number of posts shall be placed 
in the surplus pool administered by Establishment Division for a period of two 
years whereafter his services shall stand terminated. If a civil servant has 
already completed two years in the surplus pool on the date of issuance of 
guidelines, he may be allowed to remain enlisted in the pool for a period of 
another one year whereafter his services shall stand terminated. 
 
(ii) 
If a post occupied by a deputationist or a person posted under Section 10 
of Civil Servants Act, 1973 is declared surplus, the holder of the post shall 
be repatriated to his parent organization. 
 
(iii) 
During the period of his placement in the Surplus Pool a civil servant shall 
remain on the pay rolls of his parent department and he shall be entitled to 
pay and allowances which he would have drawn in the post last held by 
him on regular basis in his parent organization before his placement in the 
Pool. His post in his parent department shall be treated as supernumerary 
post and it shall be abolished after his absorption or the period mentioned 
in sub-para(i) above, whichever be earlier. 
                                                          
Now Prime Minister. 

Page - 626                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
 
(iv) 
During placement in the surplus pool, civil servants may be given the 
option to avail leave under rule 27 of the Revised Leave Rules 1980. 
 
(v) 
Civil servants placed in the surplus pool shall be posted for absorption in 
other Divisions/Departments/Organizations in accordance with rules 3(3) 
and 3(4) of the Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) 
Rules, 1973 and Section 11-A of the Civil Servants Act, 1973.  
 
(vi) 
Surplus employees in BPS 1 – 5 shall, ordinarily, be posted for absorption 
at the station of their last posting or place of domicile. Civil servants in 
BPS 6 and above may be posted at a station other than the station of their 
last posting or domicile but subject to availability of posts, efforts may be 
made to arrange their posting nearest to the station of their last posting or 
their place of domicile.  
 
(vii) 
Failure of a surplus civil servant to join new post within the prescribed time 
shall render him liable to removal from the list of surplus pool and termination 
of his services. Where the competent authority is satisfied that failure of 
surplus civil servant to report for duty at the place of his new posting within 
the prescribed time was in circumstances beyond his control, it may, for 
reasons to be recorded in writing, allow him additional time for joining or 
consider him for alternative posting at a station other than the one to which he 
was last posted.  
 
(viii)  If a Division/Department/Organization fails to accept the services of a 
civil servant transferred from surplus pool, the post shall be deemed to 
have been abolished. 
 
(ix) 
Legal provision for termination, reversion, E&D proceeding, etc shall be 
invoked only after the surplus civil servant fails to abide by the 
government orders within the given time-frame. 
 
5. 
As regards employees of the autonomous bodies, they are not civil servants and 
are governed by the regulations/instructions operative in each individual organization. Each 
Ministry/Division should, therefore, lay down a policy in consultation with the Finance Division 
for disposal of surplus employees of the autonomous bodies under its administrative control. 
 
6. 
All Ministries/Divisions are requested to comply with the above 
instructions/guidelines strictly. 
 
7. 
This supersedes all the instructions issued on the subject from time to time. 
[Authority.– Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.1/4/97-RW.III/CP.9, dated 9-10-2001]. 
1.7 
Modified Guidelines for Disposal of Federal  
Government Employees in the Surplus Pool 
The Prime Minister has been pleased to direct that all efforts be made to absorb 
surplus employees in various government departments as early as possible and the 
services of no surplus employee be terminated. However, those surplus employees who 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 627 
 
 
are willing to proceed on retirement may be allowed all admissible service benefits like 
leave, pension/gratuity etc under the normal rules.  
 
2. 
In order to implement the directive of the Prime Minister, all 
Ministries/Divisions are requested to comply with the following instructions:— 
a) 
The services of surplus civil servants shall not be terminated by the 
Ministries/Divisions /Departments. They will continue to work in 
respective departments and get their salaries etc. till absorption elsewhere. 
b) 
Surplus employees, who are willing to proceed on retirement, may be 
discharged retired (depending on the length of service) and allowed all 
admissible service benefit like leave, pension/gratuity etc under the normal 
rules. 
c) 
Ministries/Divisions may immediately report available vacancies for direct 
recruitment in Ministries/Divisions/ Departments for absorption of surplus 
employees. They shall continue obtaining clearance from Establishment 
Division before resorting to direct recruitment. 
d) 
Absorption orders issued by Establishment Division may be implement 
without delay through consultation between the old and the new 
departments of the surplus employees. The surplus employees are regular 
civil servants, appointed through prescribed selection processes like 
tests/interviews etc, they cannot be put through another selection process 
by the new departments.  
3. 
The guidelines contained in Management Services Wing, Establishment 
Division‘s O.M No. 1/4/97-RW.III/CP.9 dated 09-10-2001 are modified to the above extent. 
[Authority.– M.S Wing, Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.1/4/97-MSW-III, dated 14-05-2003]. 
1.8 
Merger of the Cadres of Urdu and English Typist/Stenotypist/ 
Stenographer for Purposes of Seniority, Promotion etc. 
 
 In the past, posts of Urdu Typist, Stenotypist/*Stenographer have been created in 
various Ministries/Divisions without consulting the Establishment Division and without 
prescribing any method of recruitment to these posts including avenues of promotion on 
account of which the incumbents of these posts have faced stagnation. The matter has been 
considered in consultation with the Finance Division and the following decisions have been 
taken:— 
(i) 
The existing posts of Urdu Typist/Urdu Stenotypist and Urdu *Stenographer 
are merged with the posts of LDC/English Typist (**RNPS 5/BPS 5), 
English Stenotypist (RNPS 8/BPS 12) and English *Stenographer (RNPS 
11/BPS 5) respectively. 
                                                          
 Now Assistant Private Secretary. 
 Revised National Pay Scales (1977). 

Page - 628                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
(ii) 
The existing incumbents of posts of Urdu Typist/ Stenotypist/Stenographer 
shall form part of the cadre of their English counterparts. 
(iii) The Urdu Typists/Stenotypists/*Stenographers who have been allowed pay 
scales different than those mentioned in (i) above shall also be treated as part 
of the cadre of their English counterparts. Any such pay scales earlier 
allowed will be treated as personal to the incumbent of the post concerned.  
(iv) The conditions/rules prescribed for appointment to the posts of LDC               
(English Typist) English Stenotypist and English *Stenographer shall 
henceforth apply to the posts of Urdu Typist/ Urdu Stenotypist and Urdu 
*Stenographer, respectively. The incumbents of these posts will, in future, 
be allowed the same pay scales as are applicable to their English 
counterparts. 
(v) 
The Urdu Typists/Stenotypists/*Stenographers will enjoy seniority, in the 
combined cadre with their English counterparts from the date of their 
continuous regular officiation as such. 
(vi) If promotion of an Urdu Typist/Stenotypist/ *Stenographer poses a placement 
problem, the post held by him may temporarily be upgraded in accordance 
with the orders/ instructions on the subject, to allow him the benefit of 
promotion. 
[Authority:– Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.5/1/77-F.II(R.6), dated 26-6-1988]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
 Now Assistant Private Secretary. 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 629 
 
 
II.   PROMOTION 
 
2.1 
Revision of Nominations for NMC, 
NS&WC,SMC and MCMC 
 
Refer to Establishment Division‘s O.M.No.F.10/1/2012-CP-II dated 30th 
December, 2015 regarding withdrawal of exemption from mandatory training courses on the 
basis of age and to state that the competent authority in Establishment Division has been 
pleased to decide that the officers who will retire during the currency of training may not be 
nominated for the course.  
[Authority:-Establishment Division‘s O.M.No.F.2-4-2015-T-I dated 06-01-2016]. 
2.2 
Equivalence of PER Grading in  
Defence and Civilian Organizations 
 
According to the latest Promotion Policy, the equivalence of the overall PER 
grading for civilian officers serving in defence organizations vis-à-vis those in the civil 
organizations is as under:— 
 
PER grading in the Army 
PER grading as in the 
Promotion Policy 
Marks 
(a) 
Outstanding 
Outstanding 
 
10 
(b) 
Above Average 
Very good 
 
8 
(c) 
High Average 
Good 
7 
 
(d) 
Average 
Average 
5 
 
(e) 
Low Average 
Below Average 
1 
 
(f) 
Below Average 
(unfit for promotion) 
Poor 
0 
 
 
 
3.  The quantification of marks for entries of ―Quality and Output of Work‖ and 
―Integrity‖ would be as under:— 
 
PER grading in the Army 
PER grading as in the 
Promotion Policy 
Marks 
(a) 
Outstanding 
Outstanding 
10 
(b) 
Above Average 
Very good 
8 
(c) 
High Average 
Good 
7 
(d) 
Average 
Average 
5 
(e) 
Low Average 
Below Average 
1 
(f) 
Below Average 
(unfit for promotion) 
Poor 
0 
 
[Authority:– Estt. Div.‘s UO No. 10(3)B1-CP.I (A-1) dated 30.10.1986.] 

Page - 630                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
2.3 
Civil Servants (Promotion to the Post of Secretary,  
BS-22 and Equivalent) Rules, 2010 
In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of section 25 of the Civil 
Servants Act, 1973 (LXXI of 1973), read with clause (h) of sub-section (1) of Section 2 
read proviso to sub-section (1) of section 9 thereof, and all other powers enabling him in 
this behalf, the Prime Minister is please to make the following rules, namely:—  
1.  
Short title, application and commencement. – (1) These rules may be 
called the Civil Servants (Promotion to the post of Secretary, BS-22 and equivalent) 
Rules, 2010. 
i. 
These rules shall apply to all posts in Basic Scale 22 in the All Pakistan 
Services or, as the case may be, civil service of the Federation or posts in 
connection with the affairs of the Federation, including the post in BS-22 
as Secretary in the Secretariat Group or equivalent in the regularly 
constituted Occupational Groups and Services and any such post 
connected with defence, hereinafter referred to as post of Basic Scale 22 in 
the Federal Government, but shall not apply to the technical posts 
specified in clause (c) of paragraph 7 (a) of the Finance Division‘s O.M. 
F.1 (I) Imp./83, dated the 18th August, 1983, read with instructions issued 
from time to time lastly modified vide Establishment Division‘s O.M. No. 
F.8/3/2006-CP-5 dated 07-05-2009. 
ii. 
They shall come into force with immediate effect. 
2. 
Definitions.– In these rules, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject 
or context,–  
(a) 
―Appendix‖ means Appendix to these rules; 
(b) 
―Appointing Authority‖ means the Prime Minister; 
(c) 
―Board‖ means the High Powered Selection Board constituted under rule 
5; 
(d) 
―Government‖ means the Federal Government; and 
(e) 
―Secretary‖ means the Secretary to the Government of Pakistan. 
3. 
Manner of Promotion.– (1) The posts in BS-22 in the Federal 
Government shall be filled in by promotion from amongst the officers specified in sub-rule (2) 
with the approval of the appointing authority on the recommendations of the Board. 
(2) 
The officers holding post in Basic Scale 21 on regular basis in an All Pakistan 
Service or, as the case may be, a civil service of the Federation or a post in connection with 
the affairs of the Federation and possessing the length of service and fulfilling other conditions 
specified in rule 4, shall be eligible for promotion to a post in Basic Scale 22 in the respective 
service, group or cadre to which the officer for the time being belongs:  
                                                          
 The preamble substituted vide Establishment Division‘s Notification S.R.O No. (I)/2017 dated 17-07-2017.   

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 631 
 
 
Provided that the post of Secretary in BS-22 in the Secretariat Group may be 
filled in by promotion in the public interest from amongst officers of regularly 
constituted Occupational Groups and Services possessing the length of service 
and fulfilling other conditions specified in rule 4, holding, on regular basis, 
posts in Basic Scale 21. 
(3) 
Nothing in this rule shall prevent a post in Basic Scale 22 or equivalent 
already reserved for initial appointment in accordance with the method of appointment 
laid down under sub-rule (2) of rule 3 of Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and 
Transfer) Rules, 1973, in filling such post in accordance with such method. 
4. 
Length of service and other conditions for promotion. – An officer 
shall possess the length of service and fulfill the following conditions for promotion to a 
post in Basic Scale 22 including the post in BS-22 as Secretary in the Secretariat Group 
or equivalent in the regularly constituted Occupational Groups and Services in the 
Federal Government; 
(i) 
Twenty-five years service in Basic Scale 17 and above, excluding the 
period of suspension not counted as duty and extraordinary leave, and has 
completed at least two years in a post in Basic Scale 21. 
(ii) 
At least three ―very good‖ reports during the last six years; 
(iii) No penalty under Government Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules 
1973 or under the Removal from Service (Special Powers) Ordinance, 2000 
(since repealed) has been imposed upon him during his tenure in BS-21; and 
(iv) Possesses sufficient variety of experience. Explanation: For the purpose of 
this rule, experience in the Secretariat or, as the case may be, in any field 
office shall be an added qualification. 
5. 
Constitution of High Power Selection Board.– (1) The Federal 
Government shall constitute a High Powered Selection Board comprising the following:- 
 
Prime Minister 
Chairman 
 
Principal Secretary to Prime Minister 
Member 
 
Cabinet Secretary 
Member 
 
Secretary, Establishment Division 
Member/  
 
 
 
Secretary to the Board 
 
Administrative Secretary concerned 
Co-opted Member 
 
[Note:- The Chairman may invite Federal Minister(s)/Minister(s) of State/ Advisor(s) to 
Prime Minister/Special Assistant(s) to the Prime Minister and Officer(s) holding 
the post in BS-22 for consultation where deemed appropriate.]  
                                                          
 The Note of Rule 5 substituted vide Establishment Div.‘s Notification S.R.O No. (I)/2017 dated 17-07-2017. 

Page - 632                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
(2) 
A panel of eligible officers in the order of their seniority shall be 
submitted to the Board. 
(3) 
The Establishment Division shall perform the functions of Secretariat of 
the Board. 
 
6. 
The existing provisions contained in the Office Memoranda about 
regularly constituted Occupational Group or Service specified in the Appendix A shall be 
deemed to have been modified to the above extent. 
APPENDIX-A 
(See rule 6) 
Occupational Groups & Services 
Name of the Occupational  
Group/Service 
OM constituting the Group/Service as 
amended from time to time 
1. 
Pakistan Audit & Accounts Service 
 
2. 
Commerce and Trade Group 
 
3. 
Customs & Excise Group 
 
 
 
4. 
Economists and Planners Group 
 
5. 
Foreign Service of Pakistan 
 
6. 
@Income Tax Group 
 
 
 
7. 
Information Group 
 
8. 
Military Lands and Cantonment Group 
 
9. 
Police Service of Pakistan 
 
 
10. 
Postal Group 
 
11. 
Office Management Group 
 
12. 
Secretariat Group 
 
 
13. 
@@District Management Group 
 
OM No.1/2/74-ARC dated 23-01-1974 
 
OM No.6/2/75-ARC dated 08-05-1975 
 
OM No.5/2/75-ARC dated 09-05-1975 read 
with OM No. 6/2/2009-CP.II  
dated 12-09-2009 
 
OM No.10/2/75-ARC dated 25-03-1976 
 
OM No.3/2/74-ARC dated 08-04-1974 
 
OM No.4/2/75-ARC dated 09-05-1975 read 
with OM No. 6/2/2009-CP.II dated 12-09-2009 
 
OM No.2/8/75-ARC dated 17-06-1977 
 
OM No.9/2/75-ARC dated 11-05-1975 
 
 
SRO. 1033 (I)/85 dated 23-10-1985 as 
amended from time to time read with OM No. 
3/2/75-ARC dated 31-05-1975 
OM No.7/2/75-ARC dated 30-05-1975 
 
OM No.1/2/75-ARC dated 27-01-1975 
 
OM No.2/2/75-ARC dated 12-04-1976 
 
OM No.2/2/74-ARC dated 23-02-1974  
as amended vide OM of even 
 number dated 14-12-1976 
 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s S.R.O. 798 (I)/2010, dated 16-8-2010]. 
                                                          
Renamed as ― Pakistan Audit & Accounts Service‖ vide Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.1/17/92-CP-II dated 10-12-2002. 
Renamed as ―Pakistan Customs Service‖ vide Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.6/2/2009 CP-II dated 12-09-2009. 
 Renamed as ―Foreign Service of Pakistan‖ vide SRO 936(1)/83 dated 29-09-1983. 
@ Now Inland Revenue Service vide Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.6/2/2009 CP-II dated 12-09-2009. 
@@Renamed as ―Pakistan Administrative Service‖ vide Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.6/3/2012 CP-II dated 21-05-2012. 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 633 
 
 
2.4 
Issuance of Revised PER Forms 
 
This Division‘s OM No. F.1/1/2012-CP-2 dated 12th October, 2012 on the above 
subject and to invite attention towards para-2 (c) of the OM under reference whereby the 
decision to revive the relevant boxes in the PER forms, deleted in 2003, was circulated. 
 
2. 
It has now been decided that the PERs in respect of all officers in BS-17 & 
18 as well as in BS-19 & 20 will be written on the revised PER Forms. The Revised 
Forms will be available on the website of the Establishment Division id est 
http://www.establishment.gov.pk for convenience of all concerned. The PERs for the 
calendar year 2013 will be initiated on the Revised Forms. Similarly, in respect of FBR and its 
lower formations, the PERs for FY 2012-13 shall be initiated on the Revised Forms. 
 
3. 
The Ministries/Divisions are requested to bring this decision to the notice 
of all Attached Departments/Sub-ordinate Offices under their administrative control for 
compliance. 
[Authority:-Estt. Div‘s OM No. 3/2/2012-CP-II dated 15-08-2013] 
 
2.5 
Clarification Regarding Quantification  
of Part PERs in Case of Incomplete  
Record 
 
Reference para 3 (Second Step) of the Addendum to Promotion Policy issued 
vide Establishment Division D.O. No.10(10)/85-CP.I, dated 15-5-1985 amended vide 
Establishment Division O.M.No.10/1/97-CP.I, dated 12-11-1998 and dated 16-11-1998. 
It is clarified that where some part PERs due for a calendar year are not available on 
record (e.g. three part reports were due in a calendar year and only one or two of them are 
available on record), the denominator I would be calculated taking into account the ratio 
of the period for which the part PERs were written with the full calendar year as per 
formula of X/12 where is the number of months for which each part report was written. 
   EXAMPLE-1: 
 
A civil servant is being considered for promotion in May, 2002 for a post carrying 
BPS 18. His record shows the following availability of PERs: 
 
1997 Average 
 
 
(full year) 
 
1998 Good 
 
 
(full year) 
 
1999 Very Good  
 
(full year) 
 
2000 Very Good  
 
(Jan – Apr) 
 
 
Good 
 
 
(May – 15 Aug) 
 
Part PER for the remaining period of the Calendar year is due but not available on 
record. 
 
2001 Good 
 
 
(full year) 
 
His marks for each year will be worked out as follows:— 
 

Page - 634                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
 
Year 
 
Marks of the reports 
(1) 1997 
 
05 
(2) 1998 
 
07 
(3) 1999 
 
08 
(4) 2000 
 
08 x 4   07x3.5 
56 
12 
56.5 
4.71 
  12 
 
 
5) 2001 
 
 
  07 
 
 
His total quantification will be worked out as follows: 
 
 
 
(8x1) + (7x2) + (5x1) + 4.71 
 
 
 
  1  +  2  +  1  +  7.5 
 
 
 
 
           12 
 
 
 
31.71 
= 
6.86 (Say 6.9) 
 
 
4.625 
 
 
 --- 
 
His overall score will be                69 
 
 
Quantification of higher posts shall be calculated in the same manner as 
illustrated in the next example: 
   EXAMPLE-2: 
 
 
 
A civil servant is being considered for promotion to a post carrying BPS 20. He 
earned the following grading during his service against posts carrying. 
 
BPS 17  
= 
4 ‗Good‘ and 1 Average 
BPS 18  
= 
2 ‗Very Good‘, 4 ‗Good‘, and 1 ‗Average‘ which is a part report for 
8 months. The remaining part report for 4 months is due but not 
initiated by the Reporting Officer. 
BPS 19   
= 
2 ‗Outstanding‘, 5 ‗Good‘, and 2 ‗Average‘. A perusal of his 
Dossier reveals that in addition to the above cited 9 PERs, the 
officer also earned three part reports during one calendar year. Of 
these, only two part reports, one ‗Very Good‘ for 4 months, and one 
‗Good‘ report for 3 months and 15 days for that calendar year is 
available in the dossier and while the report for the remaining 4 ½ 
month period is not available on record. 
 
 
His marks for PERs will be worked out as follows: 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 635 
 
 
   First Step 
 
- 
Weighted average for 1 ‗Average‘ (part) report earned in BPS 18 in one 
calendar year 
 
 
 
= 
(5x8) 
 
 
 
   12 
 
 
= 
   40 
 
 
 
   12 
 
 
 
= 
  3.33 
 
- 
Weighted average for 1 ‗Very Good‘ (4 months part report) and 1 ‗Good‘ (3 
months 15 days part report) during one calendar year in BPS 19. 
 
 
 
= 
(8x4) + (7x3.5) 
 
 
 
        12 
 
 
= 
       56.5   
 
 
 
         12 
 
 
 
= 
       4.71 
  Second Step 
 
- 
Average marks for post carrying BPS 17 
 
 
 
= 
(7x4) + (5x1) 
 
 
 
         5 
 
 
= 
        33 
 
 
 
         5 
 
 
 
= 
         6.6 
 
- 
Average marks for post carrying BPS 18 
 
 
 
= 
(8x2) + (7x4) + (3.33) 
6 
+  8  
         12 
 
 
= 
             47.33   
 
 
 
               6.67 
 
 
 
= 
               7.09 
 
 
 
 
             (X /12) 
 
- 
Average marks for post carrying BPS 19 
 
 
 
= 
(10x2) + (7x5) + (5.2) + (4.71) 
9 + 7.5 
      12 
 
 
= 
             69.71   
 
 
 
             9.625 
 
 
 
= 
               7.24 
 
 
 
 
 
(X/12) 

Page - 636                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
  Third Step 
 
 
BS 17  = 2 X 6.6 = 13.2 
 
BS 18  = 3 X 7.09 = 21.27 
 
BS 19  = 5 X 7.24 = 36.2 
 
 
= 70.67 (say 71) 
 
His final score for PERs will be 71. 
[Authority:– Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.10(1)/97-CP.I/CP.II, dated 7.5.2002]. 
Sl.No.3  
 
Civil Servants Promotion (BPS-18 to BPS-21) Rules,2019 
S.R.O 1493(I)/2019.— In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of 
section 25 of the Civil Servants Act,1973(LXXI of 1973) read with Notification No. 
S.R.O. 120(I)/98 dated the 27th February,1998, the Prime Minister is pleased to make the 
following rules, namely: 
1. 
Short title, application and commencement.— (1) These rules shall be 
called the Civil Servants Promotion (BPS-18 to BPS-21) Rules,2019. 
(2) 
These rules shall apply for promotion of civil servants to all posts in 
Basic Pay Scales 18 to 21 for the time being reserved for promotion in their respective 
cadres or services.  
(3) 
These rules shall come into force at once.  
2. 
Definitions.— In these rules, unless there is anything repugnant in the 
subject or context— 
(a) 
―Act‖ means the Civil Servants Act,1973 (LXXI of 1973); 
(b) 
―actualization‖ means assumption of charge of the higher post upon 
promotion; 
(c) 
―appointing authority‖ shall have the same meaning as assigned thereto in 
rule 2 of the Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) 
Rules,1973; 
(d) 
―Central Selection Board‖ or ―CSB‖ means a board constituted under 
clause (b) of rule 2 of the Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and 
Transfer) Rules,1973 to consider promotion of civil servants to BPS-
20/21 and equivalent; 
(e) 
―consideration for promotion‖ means consideration of a civil servant for 
promotion by the CSB, respective DSB or DPC irrespective of the 
recommendations made by such CSB, DSB or DPC resulting in his/her 
promotion, acting charge appointment, deferment or supersession; 
(f) 
―Departmental Selection Board‘ or ―DSB‖ means a board constituted 
under clause (b) of rule 2 of the Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion 
and Transfer) Rules, 1973 to consider promotion of civil servants to BPS-
19 and equivalent; 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 637 
 
 
(g) 
―Departmental Promotion Committee‖ or ―DPC‖ means a committee 
constituted under clause (d) of rule 2 of the Civil Servant (Appointment, 
Promotion and Transfer) Rules,1973 to consider promotion of civil 
servants to BPS-18 and equivalent; 
(h) 
―deferment‖ means deferment of a civil servant for promotion approved 
by the appointing authority on recommendations of the CSB, DSB or 
DPC, as the case may be, for reasons to be recorded in writing; 
(i) 
―dossier‖ means the detailed record and information with regard to an 
officer; 
(j) 
―field posting‖ means the posting of officers of Police Service of Pakistan 
or any particular occupational group or service against any particular post 
and in specified departments or organizations as notified by the 
Establishment Division through policy instructions; 
(k) 
―Government‘ means the Federal Government; 
(l) 
―mandatory training‖ means the training of an officer required for 
consideration of his/her promotion to a particular post or basic pay scale 
as provided in rule 19; 
(m) 
―promotion‖ means appointment by promotion as provided in the Civil 
Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules,1973. 
(n) 
―schedule‖ means schedule to these rules; and  
(o) 
―supersession‖ means the decision of the appointing authority on the 
recommendations of the CSB,DSB or DPC, as the case may be, to 
supersede an officer for promotion to a higher basic pay scale or post on a 
particular occasion.  
(2) 
All other words and expressions used but not defined in these rules shall, 
unless the context otherwise requires, have the same meanings assigned thereto in the 
Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, Civil Servants Act, 1973 (LXXI of 
1973) and rules made thereunder. 
3. 
Composition of CSB, DSB and DPC.—(1)   The constitution of CSB 
and DSB shall be notified by the Establishment Division with the approval of Prime 
Minister. 
(2) 
The DPC shall be constituted in accordance with rule 4 of the Civil 
Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973. 
4. 
Consideration by CSB, DSB and DPC.—(1)   The CSB, DSB or DPC, 
as the case may be, shall consider a civil servant for promotion in order of seniority and 
in accordance with these rules or the recruitment rules or the criteria specified for 
promotion to the particular post.  
(2) 
While making consideration under sub-rule(1), the CSB, DSB or DPC, as 
the case may be, shall follow the provisions of these rules and guidelines set out in 
Schedule-I to these rules. 
(3) 
Subject to availability of a post for the time being reserved for promotion, 
a civil servant shall be considered for promotion and after such consideration, he shall be 
recommended for— 

Page - 638                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
(a) 
promotion; or 
(b) 
appointment on acting charge basis; or 
(c) 
deferment; or 
(d) 
supersession  
(4) 
Subject to rule 8-B of Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and 
Transfer) Rules, 1973, the consideration as well as recommendations of a civil servant for 
acting charge appointment shall be made in accordance with the manner of consideration 
of a civil servant for promotion. 
5. 
Approval of recommendations by the appointing authority. — (1) 
The recommendations made by the CSB, DSB or DPC shall have no effect unless 
approved by the appointing authority concerned.  
(2) 
In case a civil servant is recommended for promotion by the CSB, DSB 
or DPC conditionally and such recommendations have been approved by the appointing 
authority, the promotion of such a civil servant shall be notified after the required 
conditions are fulfilled. 
(3) 
The appointing authority shall have the powers to approve or reject or 
remand back the recommendations of the CSB, DSB or DPC. 
(4) 
In case of rejection or remand back of any particular recommendations, 
the appointing authority shall record reasons for doing so. 
(5) 
Recommendations of the CSB, DSB or DPC duly approved by the 
appointing authority if not actualized shall lapse after one year reckoned from the date of 
such approval by the appointing authority and such cases shall require re-submission for 
consideration by the CSB, DSB or DPC concerned, provided that the delay in such 
actualization is attributable to the officer recommended for promotion. 
6. 
Eligibility criteria for consideration for promotion. — (1) The 
minimum criteria for consideration of promotion to various posts shall be — 
(a) 
fulfillment of length of service for promotion to any particular post or 
basic pay scale or grade that has been separately specified; 
Provided that the conditions made by the President as reproduced in 
Schedule-II shall apply while calculating the length of service of the civil 
servant for his/her promotion; 
(b) 
satisfactory completion of mandatory training; 
(c) 
possession of qualification and experience and other conditions as 
prescribed in the relevant recruitment rules, if notified separately; 
(d) 
fulfillment of mandatory conditions of the rotation policy so specified for 
any service, group or cadre; 
(e) 
fulfillment of policy for field posting, if so specified for any service, 
group or cadre; and 
(f) 
fulfillment of other terms and conditions for the time being in force. 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 639 
 
 
(2) 
The minimum criteria under sub-rule (1) in no way shall vest the right 
whatsoever for promotion to a particular post. 
7. 
Conditions for deferment. — On consideration for promotion in order 
of seniority, a civil servant shall be recommended for deferment, if — 
(a) 
the officer does not meet the eligibility criteria as contained in rule 6; 
(b) 
the officer has not submitted Part-I and Part-II of his/her performance 
 
  
evaluation report (PER) form to his/her reporting officer; 
(c) 
the CSB, DSB or DPC considers that service record of the officer is 
 
incomplete in any aspect; 
(d) 
the CSB, DSB or DPC wants to further watch performance of the 
 
  
officer for any reason to be recorded in writing: 
 
Provided that period of performance to be watched under this 
 
  
clause shall not exceed twelve months; 
(e) 
disciplinary or departmental proceedings are pending against the civil 
 
  
servant: 
 
Provided that this clause shall not be applicable in cases, where on the 
date of consideration of the civil servant for promotion, such proceedings 
are pending for more than a year and the delay has not been caused by 
any reason attributable to the officer; 
 
(f) 
the civil servant is for a period of not less than one year on deputation to a 
 
 
foreign government or international agency irrespective of whether it is 
 
  
located abroad or within the country[: 
 Provided that this clause shall not be applicable to those civil servants 
who have been appointed or nominated for deputation to international 
organizations against reserved and specified posts, as defined in the 
relevant rules and are representing Government of Pakistan therein; and] 
(g) 
 the civil servant is availing ex-Pakistan leave including extra ordinary 
leave or study leave as well as similar leave within Pakistan for a period 
of not less than one year; 
 (h) 
 the civil servants who have availed ex-Pakistan leave including 
extraordinary leave or study leave as well as similar leave within 
Pakistan for a period of not less than one year and have not earned one 
full year PER on return from such leave; 
(i) 
 an inquiry, investigation, case or a reference is pending against any 
civil servant in Anti-Corruption Establishment, Federal Investigation 
Agency, National Accountability Bureau or such other organization by 
whatever name called for: 
 
 
Provided that this clause shall not be applicable in such cases, 
where on the date of consideration of a civil servant for promotion, [the 
                                                          
Subs.& inserted vide S.R.O No. 1057(I)/2020 dated 13-10-2020. 

Page - 640                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
total period of pendency comprising inquiry, investigation, case or 
reference is more than three years] and the delay has not been caused by 
any reason attributable to the officer; 
(j) 
the civil servant has not submitted his/her annual declaration of assets 
 
  
forms for the last five years; or  
(k) 
there is any other reason to be recorded in writing by the CSB,DSB or 
DPC as the case may be. 
8. 
Conditions for supersession.— A civil servant shall be recommended 
for supersession, if — 
(a) 
he/she does not meet the requisite threshold for promotion to a 
 
  
particular post or grade in any particular service, group or post; 
(b) 
subject to the provisions of rule 22, he/she fails thrice for any 
 
  
reason to attend the mandatory training; or  
(c) 
there is any other reason which shall be recorded in writing by the 
 
 
CSB, DSB or DPC as the case may be.  
9. 
Consideration of promotion in case seniority is sub-judice.— (1) A 
civil servant whose seniority is sub-judice may be considered for promotion subject to 
final outcome of the court case.  
(2) 
The promotion if approved under sub-rule (1) shall be considered a 
temporary promotion and the juniors so promoted on the basis of a sub-judice seniority 
shall be assigned seniority as per final court orders and in case no vacancy remains 
available in the cadre, the junior most shall be reverted to lower post or grade, as the case 
may be.  
10. 
Consideration of promotion of civil servants who were deferred/ 
superseded.— (1) A civil servant deferred, except under clause (d) of rule 7, shall be 
considered for promotion again after the reason on the basis of which the deferment took 
place ceases to exist.  
(2) 
The civil servants falling in the category mentioned in clauses (g) and (h) 
of rule 7 shall be considered for promotion only on return to a cadre post and earning at 
least one PER for full year before consideration for promotion.  
(3) 
The one full year PER referred in sub-rule (2) means a report of twelve 
complete months inclusive of period spend on mandatory training: 
Provided that if an officer has not earned PER of complete one year (twelve 
months) and has earned only part PER in that year for reasons beyond his/her control, 
then his/her special report, for the period of deficiency, earned subsequently shall be 
taken into account to complete the twelve months requirement for the purpose.  
(4) 
In case where an officer has returned from deputation abroad or joined 
duty after availing leave of one year or more but no PER is due in the present grade, 
                                                                                                                                                
 Substituted vide S.R.O No. 1030(I)/2021 dated 12-08-2021. 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 641 
 
 
his/her overall PER grading for the previous grade shall be counted, for the purpose of 
quantification in the present grade: 
Provided that only such cases shall be covered under this sub-rule wherein an 
officer after such return from deputation abroad or leave has served within the cadre for a 
period of one complete year reckoned from the date the officer assumes duty after such 
return till the date of holding the meeting of the CSB,DSB or DPC, as the case may be.  
Provided further that in such cases a satisfactory special report of the officer in 
present basic pay scale shall invariably be required but the same shall not be quantified 
under any circumstances.  
(5) 
A civil servant, once superseded for promotion under rule 8 shall be 
eligible for reconsideration only after he/she earns one more PER of one full year.  
11. 
Consideration for promotion of civil servants who are on deputation 
abroad.— (1) Promotion of a civil servant on deputation to an international agency or 
foreign government abroad or within the country for a period not less than one year shall 
only be considered after the officer resumes duty on his/her cadre post.  
(2) 
Before consideration for promotion a civil servant upon his/her return 
from deputation shall be required to earn PER for period mentioned in column (3) of the 
table below in relation to period of deputation as mentioned in column (2) of that Table, 
namely:— 
TABLE 
S.No. 
Period of Deputation 
Minimum period of PER 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
1. 
One year  
Three complete months 
2. 
Between one to three years 
Six complete months 
3. 
Above three years 
Twelve complete months/ Complete one year 
 
 
(3) 
In case the period of deputation is less than one year, the civil servant 
shall be considered for promotion but the officer shall actualize his/her promotion on 
return from such a deputation on a cadre post.  
 
[(4) Civil servants who have been appointed or nominated for deputation to 
international organizations against reserved and specified posts, as defined in relevant 
rules, and are representing Government of Pakistan therein shall be considered for 
promotion subject to fulfillment of eligibility criteria.]  
 
12. 
Consideration for promotion of civil servants who are on leave.—(1) 
A civil servant having availed or availing ex-Pakistan leave or leave within Pakistan 
including extra ordinary leave or study leave shall be considered for promotion by the 
CSB or concerned DSB or DPC, provided such leave is less than one year. However, on 
approval of recommendation of promotion by the appointing authority, the promotion 
shall be actualized on return from leave.  
                                                          
Added vide S.R.O No. 1057(I)/2020 dated 13-10-2020. 

Page - 642                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
  
(2) 
A civil servant having availed or availing ex-Pakistan leave or leave 
within Pakistan including extra ordinary leave or study leave for a period of not less than 
one year shall be required to earn a PER for one full year after the officer joins back:  
 
Provided, that the training period and the training evaluation report (TER) shall 
also be included for the purpose of computation of twelve complete months period and 
evaluation. 
 
Provided further, that one full year shall start from the date the officer joins back.  
 
Provided further that civil servants availing scholarships after a competitive 
process and through Technical Assistance Program shall only be required to produce the 
evidence of successful completion of the course and the provision of sub-rule (2) of rule 
12 shall not apply to such cases.  
 
13. 
Reservation of vacancies.— In case of deferment of seniors, particularly 
in small cadres, the CSB, DSB or the DPC may, as it may deem fit, recommend to 
reserve a vacancy or vacancies for future promotions in the cadre for reasons to be 
recorded in writing.  
 
14. Promotion to various posts.— (1) The posts in BPS-19 to BPS-21 shall be 
selection posts, while the posts in BPS-18 shall be non-selection posts.  
 
(2) 
For selection posts, PERs and TERs shall be given due importance as 
prescribed under these rules. Dossier and collective judgment of the CSB or DSB shall 
also be taken into account.  
 
(3) 
Promotion from BPS-17 to BPS-18 posts, shall be on seniority-cum-
fitness, based on PERs score, passing of the departmental examination, successful 
completion of training courses, as the case may be, if so prescribed.  
 
15. 
Specialist cadres.— (1) The condition of mandatory training as 
contained in clause (b) of sub rule (1) of rule 6 shall not be strictly applicable to civil 
servants belonging to specialist cadres such as doctors, engineers, teachers, professors, 
research scientists and incumbents of purely technical posts, for promotion within their 
own lines of specialization under their respective service rules.  
 
(2) 
In case of interpretation of this rule and to declare any particular post or 
cadre as ―specialist cadre‖ for the purposes of exemption of mandatory training, the 
Establishment Division shall examine such cases and decide the same as deemed 
appropriate.  
 
16. 
Efficiency index for promotion, deferment and supersession.— The 
minimum threshold of marks for promotion to various basic pay scales mentioned in 
column (2) of the Table below shall be as mentioned in column (3) of that Table, 
namely:— 
TABLE  
S.No. 
Basic Pay 
Scale 
Aggregate marks of 
efficiency index 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
1. 
BS-18 
60 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 643 
 
 
2. 
BS-19 
65 
3. 
BS-20 
70 
4. 
BS-21 
75 
 
17. 
Panel of officers per vacancy.— (1) A panel consisting of a minimum of 
two officers per vacancy shall be submitted for consideration of the CSB,DSB or DPC 
depending on availability of the eligible officers in the cadre.  
 
(2) 
The panel of officers under sub-rule (1) shall be in addition to cases of 
officers superseded in previous meetings of the CSB, DSB or DPC.  
 
18. 
Quantification of PERs, training evaluation reports and CSB, DSB 
and DPC evaluation.— (1) For the purpose of consideration by the CSB, DSB and DPC, 
the PERs shall be quantified in accordance with the formula as set out in Schedule III. 
 
(2) 
For the purposes of promotion to BPS-18, the PERs shall have the 
weightage of hundred percent.   
 
(3) 
For the purposes of promotion to the posts in BPS-19 , BPS-20 and BPS-
21, the following quantification method shall be followed namely:— 
 
(a) 
PERs in respect of two preceding BPS or the last fifteen years whichever 
is more shall be quantified. If the service of an officer in present and 
previous BPS is less than fifteen years then the deficiency shall be met by 
taking into account the PERs of next lower BPS, which shall be bracketed 
with the PERs of preceding BPS. Quantification of PERs relating to 
present and previous BPS will have a ratio of 60%: 40%. 
 
(b) 
the marks mentioned in column (3) of the table below shall be allocated 
for quantification of PERs, training evaluation report and CSB and DSB 
evaluation as mentioned in column (2) of the Table namely:—   
TABLE 
 
 
 
 
(c) 
the objective assessment form as set out in Schedule-IV to these rules 
shall be placed before the CSB and DSB alongwith panel proforma of 
every officer for objective evaluation. The CSB and DSB shall assess 
each officer on the panel on the basis of parameters and attributes as 
given in the respective objective assessment form for promotion; 
S.No. 
Factor 
Marks 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
1. 
Quantification of PERs 
40% 
2. 
Training Evaluation Reports (TERs) 
30% 
3. 
Evaluation by CSB and DSB 
30% 
4. 
Total 
100% 

Page - 644                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
 
(d) 
the CSB or DSB, as the case may be, shall apply its collective judgment 
to determine the fitness for promotion to selection posts as per parameters 
given in the objective assessment form and shall award marks to an 
officer and place him in category A,B or C in accordance with the 
classification given in the following Table, namely:— 
            TABLE 
Category 
Marks 
(1) 
(2) 
A 
21 to 30 
B 
11 to 20 
C 
01 to 10 
   
(e) 
in such cases whereby a civil servant [,belonging to a specialist cadre,] 
was not required to undergo mandatory training, weightage of PERs shall 
be 50% and marks out of 50% shall be awarded by the CSB and DSB; 
and 
 
(f) 
in case, a civil servant has been appointed in the cadre in the present 
scale, his/her PERs of the present scale shall be given the total weightage 
assigned to the PERs in the Table under clause (b). 
 
19. 
Trainings.— Except civil servants belonging to specialist cadres, every 
civil servant shall successfully undergo the mandatory trainings mentioned in column (3) of 
the table below for promotion to next higher BPS as mentioned in that Table namely:— 
TABLE 
S.No. 
For promotion from 
Name of course 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
1. 
BPS-18 to BPS-19 
Mid-Career Management Course (MCMC) 
2. 
BPS-19 to BPS-20 
Senior Management Course (SMC) 
3. 
BPS-20 to BPS-21  
National Management Course(NMC)/ National 
Security and War Course (NSWC) at NDU 
 
 
 
20. 
Training evaluation reports.— A total thirty marks shall be allocated to 
the last two training evaluation reports (18 marks @ 60% for the training in the present 
scale and 12 marks @ 40% in the previous scale). In case of promotion to BPS-19, there 
is only one training, hence calculation shall be made out of 30 marks. Evaluation of 
reports from the training institutions shall be worked out as set out in Schedule-V.  
 
21. 
Exemption from mandatory training.— Subject to provisions of clause 
(b) of rule 8, an officer who is likely to retire within two years from service on attaining 
the age of superannuation shall be exempted from the mandatory training.  
                                                          
Inserted vide Establishment Division S.R.O No. 58(I)/2020 dated 25-01-2020. 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 645 
 
 
 
22. 
Declining to proceed on mandatory training.— (1) The provincial 
governments or as the case may be, the ministries, divisions and departments concerned 
may make a request for deferment from training of a civil servant only once.  
 
(2) 
Any relaxation of sub-rule (1) shall require specific approval of the Prime 
Minister.  
 
23. 
Communication of reasons of deferment and supersession.— The civil 
servants deferred or superseded shall, immediately after the recommendations of the 
CSB,DSB and DPC have been approved by the respective appointing authority, 
invariably be informed about the reasons of their deferments and supersessions.  
 
24. 
Responsibilities 
of 
the 
Departmental 
Representative.—While 
forwarding proposals for consideration of CSB, DSB and DPC the administrative 
Ministries, Divisions and Departments shall follow the guidelines set out in Schedule-VI.  
 
25. 
Repeal.— The policy instructions including promotion policy, issued by 
the Establishment Division from time to time and all other policy instructions related to 
promotion of civil servants in BPS-18, BPS-19, BPS-20 and BPS-21, in so far as 
inconsistent to these rules, are hereby repealed.  
[F. No.1/1/2018-CP-II) 
 
 
  
 
 
 
        DR.ALI RAZA, 
 
 
  
 
 
           Section Officer (CP-II/Policy), 
 
 
  
 
 
       Establishment Division, Islamabad.   
 
___________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page - 646                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
SCHEDULE-I 
[See rule 4(2)] 
Guidelines for CSB/DSB/DPC 
 
While considering cases of officers on the panel, the CSB,DSB and DPC 
concerned shall adhere to the following guidelines, namely:— 
(a) 
performance evaluation reports shall be given due importance but shall 
not be the sole criterion for promotion to selection posts; 
(b) 
a civil servant shall only be promoted within his/her own group, service 
or cadre, as the case may be, against the vacancies allocated thereof. 
Those posted out of their group, service or cadre shall be considered for 
promotion on their turn but if selected, the actual promotion shall take 
place only when they rejoin their parent group, service or cadre.  
(c) 
a civil servant superseded will not be considered for promotion unless 
he/she has earned PERs for one full year. The following illustration/ 
elaboration further clarify the position: 
PERs for one full year shall imply, one full year PER(s) earned after 
consideration/supersession by the Selection Board and will include the 
PER which was neither due nor placed before the Selection Board even if 
it relates to the previous year. 
Illustration-I 
If an officer ‗A‘ is considered by the Selection Board in Jan,2019 when 
his/her PER for 2018 is neither due nor placed before the Selection Board 
and superseded. He will be considered after earning one full year PERs 
for 2018. 
Illustration-II 
If an officer ‗B‘ is considered by the Selection Board in January,2019 
when his/her PER for 2018 is not due but placed before the Selection 
Board and superseded. He/she will be considered after earning one full 
year PERs for 2019. 
Illustration-III 
If an officer ‗C‘ is considered by the Selection Board in May,2019 when 
his/her PER for 2018 is due and placed before the Board and superseded. 
He will be considered after earning the PER of 2019. 
(d) 
Posts carrying basic pay scale 19 are generally supervisory posts. 
Supervision can be effective only if the supervisor has the relevant 
experience. These officers are also required to make contribution to 
policy-making at the lowest rung of the policy-making hierarchy. For 
promotion to these posts, therefore, a civil servant must fulfill qualifying 
service, eligibility threshold, qualifications, training, relevance of 
experience, quality and output of work and integrity. 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 647 
 
 
(e) 
Posts carrying basic pay scale 20 are middle management posts. Field 
offices are generally headed by the officers in this scale. It is, therefore, 
essential that in addition to the relevance of experience these officers 
must also have a sufficient variety and width of experience so that: 
(i) 
they acquire an overview of the functions performed by these 
 
 
  
organizations within the broader framework of government‘s 
 
 
 
overall objectives/activities to ensure smooth and effective 
 
 
 
management at the field level; and 
(ii) 
they can lend pragmatism to policy formulation in assignments at 
the Secretariat. Variety of experience would include experience in 
the field, corporations, attached departments, different Ministries/ 
Divisions and in our Missions abroad.  
For promotion to middle management posts, a civil servant must 
fulfill qualifying service, eligibility threshold, qualifications, 
relevance of experience, quality and output of work and 
integrity, variety of experience and training.  
Selection Board should give due consideration to the nature of 
duties, duration and location of posts previously held by the 
officer. Depending on the post to be filled, an officer possessing 
well rounded experience should normally be preferred 
particularly if he /she has served with distinction in unattractive 
areas. While some exposure to a corporation, autonomous body 
or an ex-cadre assignment may be considered a positive feature, 
this would not be so where an officer has stayed away from 
his/her parent cadre for too long. 
(f) 
Posts carrying basic pay scale 21 fall in senior management involving 
important policy-making or extensive administrative jurisdictions. In 
addition to the circulation value and variety of experience the incumbents 
must possess proven analytical competence, breadth of vision, emotional 
maturity and such other qualities as determine the potential for 
successfully holding posts in top management. This potential cannot be 
judged by mathematical formula. The Selection Board will have to apply 
its collective judgment to determine the same.  
For promotion to senior management posts, a civil servant must fulfill 
qualifying service, eligibility threshold, qualifications, relevance of 
experience, quality and output of work and integrity, variety of 
experience, training and Top Management Potential.  
Since officers promoted to this level may be called upon to hold 
independent charge of a Ministry/Division or to head a major corporation, 
the board should satisfy itself about the officer‘s maturity, balance and 
ability to assume such top management positions even at short notice.  
 
 

Page - 648                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
SCHEDULE-II 
[See rule 6 (1) (a)] 
MINIMUM LENGTH OF SERVICE FOR ELIGIBILITY FOR PROMOTION TO 
POSTS IN VARIOUS BPS  
 
In pursuance of rule 8-A of the Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and 
Transfer) Rules,1973 and in supersession of the instructions laid down in the 
Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 1/9/80 R.II (A), dated the 12th January,1981, the 
President is pleased to decide that the minimum length of service for promotion to 
various basic pay scales shall be as follows:— 
 
- For BPS 18 
 
 
5 years in BS 17 
 
- For BPS 19 
 
 
12 years in BS 17 and above 
 
- For BPS 20 
 
 
17 years in BS 17 and above 
 
- For BPS 21 
 
 
22 years in BS 17 and above 
 
- For BPS 22 
25 years in BS 17 & above and 02 years in 
BS 21 
  
Provided that:— 
(i) 
Where initial appointment of a person not being a person in government 
service, takes place in a post in BPS 18, 19 or 20, the length of service 
specified in this Office Memorandum shall be reduced by the following 
periods; 
First appointment in  
 
Reduced by  
BPS-18 
 
 
 
5 years  
BPS-19 
 
 
 
12 years 
BPS-20 
 
 
 
17 years 
(ii) 
Where initial appointment of a person already in government service 
takes place, on recommendations of the Federal Public Service 
Commission, in a post in BPS 18,19 or 20, the length of service specified 
in this Office Memorandum shall be reduced by the periods specified in 
provision (i); 
(iii) 
Where first appointment of a person other than a person covered by 
proviso (ii) was made to government service in BPS 16 or below, one-
half of the service in BPS 16 and one fourth in BPS 15 and below may be 
counted as service in BPS 17 for computing length of service for the 
purpose of promotion only.  
 
 
 
 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 649 
 
 
SCHEDULE-III 
(See rule 18 (1)] 
QUANTIFYING THE PERFORMANCE EVALUATION REPORTS 
1. 
In accordance with clause (a) of sub-rule 3 of rule 18 of Civil Servants 
Promotion (BPS-18 to BPS-21) Rules, 2019, Performance Evaluation Reports (PERs) of 
an officer will be considered for promotion to posts carrying basic pay scales 18 to 21 or 
equivalent.  
2. 
 (a) The overall gradings in the PERs are allocated the following marks: 
 
 
Overall Grading 
 
 
Marks 
 
  
(i) 
Outstanding 
 
10 
 
  
(ii) 
Very Good  
 
8 
 
  
(iii) 
Good 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
  
(iv) 
Average 
 
 
5 
 
  
(v) 
Below Average 
 
1 
 
(b) 
If the overall grading in a PER is ambiguous e.g. placed between ‗Good‘ 
 
  
and ‗Average‘, the PER will be returned to R.O/C.O for clarification.   
 
(c) 
In case the assessment of the countersigning officer differs from that of the 
reporting officer in any PER, the quantification will be based on the 
overall grading recorded by the countersigning officer.  
 
(d) 
In case where there is a second countersigning officer, the quantification 
will be based on the overall grading recorded by the second 
countersigning officer. 
 
(e) 
Where two or more performance evaluation reports were initiated in a 
calendar year, the marks for that year shall be quantified as the sum of the 
weighted averages of these PERs. 
 
(f) 
Where an officer, appointed to a higher post on acting charge basis, is 
considered for regular promotion to that post, the PERs earned during his 
acting charge appointment will be added to the PERs earned in the lower 
post for calculating average marks. 
3. 
The marks for PERs shall be computed separately for each grade/level of 
posts carrying the same basic pay scale and a weighted aggregate score will be worked 
out as follows: 
a) 
For each calendar year earning 02 or more PERs vide 2 (e), part  report in 
 
a calendar year will be quantified on the basis of weightage average 
 
proportionately, instead of their arithmetic mean / average, to determine 
 
the yearly score of PERs. 
b) 
To calculate the PER scores in a Basic Pay Scale/Grade, the average 
 
of all the yearly scores will be taken. 
c) 
Weightage will be applied to the PER score and training score for 
 
computing the aggregate score, as per clauses (a), (b) & (e) of  
sub-rule 
 
3 of rule 18 and as per rule 20. 

Page - 650                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
d) 
The following addition / deductions shall be made in the total marks 
 
worked out: 
 
A. 
Additions  
 
Officers who serve as members of the faculty in the government 
  
training institutions for a minimum of one year in continuity, shall  be 
 
awarded extra points (maximum upto five points) towards their ―blood 
 
count‖ for the purpose of promotion as per the following criteria:— 
a) 
National Management College National 
Management Wing (NMW) (NMC) 
b) 
Executive Development Institute 
c) 
National Institute of Public Policy 
d) 
National Defence University 
 
3 Marks (a) to (d) 
e) 
National Management College Senior 
Management Wing (SMW) (SMC) 
f) 
Or any other place where Senior 
Management Course is conducted 
 
2 Marks for (e) to (f) 
g) 
NIMs, Civil Service Academy and all 
other Government Training Institutions 
including those meant for Specialized 
training 
 
1 Marks for (g) 
i) 
The officers who had served in a government training institution, 
including  those meant for specialized training in any particular cadre for 
a period of 2 years or more before 02-01-2006, would continue to get 2 
additional marks as per policy in force at that time.  
ii) 
The officers who are posted on or after 02-01-2006 in the institutions, 
would get additional marks on the completion of one year in terms of 
modified policy. Similarly, the officers who were serving in training 
institutions but had not completed 2 years on 02-01-2006 would not get 2 
additional marks, but get 3,2 or 1 mark, as the case may be, in accordance 
with the modified policy.  
B. 
Deductions:  
(i) 
For each major penalty imposed under the Govt. 
Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules,1973 
5 Marks 
(ii) 
For each minor penalty imposed under the *Govt. 
Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules,1973 
3 Marks 
(iii) For adverse remarks deductions be made for such 
remarks only as were duly conveyed to the officer 
concerned and were not expunged on his representation, 
or the officer did not represent 
1 
Mark 
per 
PER 
containing 
adverse 
remarks 
                                                          
 Now Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules, 2020. 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 651 
 
 
The deduction of marks due to penalty or adverse remarks shall be done only 
once i.e. when an officer‘s case comes up for consideration for promotion to the 
next higher grade. Once the officer has been promoted to the higher grade no 
deduction shall be made subsequently. 
 
Example No. 1  
An officer is being considered for promotion to BPS 19. He was awarded a 
minor penalty in BPS 18. Deduction of 3 marks shall be made from his total 
quantification whenever his case comes for promotion to BPS 19. Till such time 
that he is promoted to the next grade (i.e. BPS 19 in this case) his overall 
quantification shall worked out with deduction of 3 marks.  
 
Example No. 2  
The same officer is now being considered for promotion to BPS-20. He was 
awarded minor penalty in BPS 18 and was subsequently promoted to BPS-19. 
While calculating his quantification for promotion to BPS-19, deduction of 3 
marks was made from his total quantification. However, now that the officer has 
been promoted to BPS 19 and is being considered for promotion to BPS 20 no 
deduction shall be made from his total quantification.    
―[Exemption from Training 
 
Subject to clause (e) of sub-rule (3) of rule 18, if an officer is exempted from one or 
both trainings on the basis of either belonging to a specialist cadre or on attaining a certain age 
as given in rule 21 of these rules, his training score for the respective training or trainings shall 
be placed at the disposal of the CSB or the DSB, as the case may be.; and]  
[**] 
**[***********] 
Endorsement of Quantification Score 
 
To maintaining 100% accuracy in the process of quantification of the PERs, 
following process shall be adopted: 
(a) 
the quantification sheets shall be signed by the official designated to do so, 
besides its countersignature by a responsible supervising officer; and 
(b) 
that any incorrect quantification identified during the course of inspection 
or re-verification shall be treated as an act of inefficiency and misconduct 
punishable under the Efficiency and Discipline Rules, besides liability 
under the criminal law. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
Substituted vide Establishment Division S.R.O No. 58(I)/2020 dated 25-01-2020. 
 
 The heading ―Single Training‖ and the provision thereunder has been omitted vide S.R.O No.58(I)/2020 
dated 25-01-2020. 

Page - 652                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
Schedule-IV 
[See rule 18(3)(c)] 
CONFIDENTIAL 
 
GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN 
MINISTRY/DIVISION_________________ 
OBJECTIVE ASSESSMENT BY CENTRAL/DEPARTMENTAL 
SELECTION BOARD 
Officer‘s Name:_________________ 
 
Seniority No.:______________ 
Group/Service/Cadre:________________ 
 
Present Scale:_______________ 
Sr. 
No. 
Parameters/Attributes 
Total Marks 
30 
Marks 
Assigned 
1. Output and quality of work 
Proficiency/productivity/objectivity/effectiveness Dossier 
and documentary evidence 
 
3 
 
2. Variety and Relevance of Experience  
Secretariat/Field postings: Federal/ Provincial Government 
Posting; Leadership/Routine  Postings; Deputation/Foreign 
Postings 
3 
 
3. Professional Expertise 
Organization/methodical/reliability 
under 
pressure 
/ 
knowledgeable/level headedness.  
Based on dossier and career profile, TERs 
3 
 
4. Personality Profile 
(As known to the Board Members primarily on the basis of 
dossier/documentary evidence) 
3 
 
5. Conduct, Discipline, Behavior 
Observation by RO/CO during the last 05 years OR as 
known to the Board Members primarily on the basis of 
dossier/documentary evidence   
3 
 
6. Leadership 
Functional ability/confidence/decision-making; based on 
dossier, TERS, PERs   
3 
 
7. Estimated Potential for Middle/Higher Management 
Based on PERs and TERs; Management Skills, Ability to 
take decisions, Strategic Thinking, Leadership Qualities, 
Drive for Results and Accomplishments in BPS-19 and 20 
in policy formulation and implementation  
3 
 
8. Integrity/General Reputation/Perception 
Professional 
Ethics/Conduct; 
On 
the 
basis 
of 
PERs/TERs/Opinion of the Board primarily based on the 
dossier/documentary evidence    
3 
 
9. Commitment to Public Service; 
Devotion to duty/drive/motivation based on PERs, Career 
Profile, Dossier 
3 
 
10. Teamwork; 
Communication / motivation / interpersonal relations based 
on Career profile, PERs, TERs 
3 
 
 
  
 
 
 
         Total Marks 
 
Overall Category______________ 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 653 
 
 
SCHEDULE-V 
[See rule 20] 
Evaluation of reports from the training institutions shall be worked out as under:  
 
(a) 
it shall be on the basis of grade percentage already awarded by the 
National School of Public Policy (National Management College and 
Senior Management Wing) and its allied training institutions and NS&W 
Course at NDU as provided in their reports;  
 
(b) 
in respect of reports of former Pakistan Administrative Staff College and 
former NIPAs where no such percentage has been awarded, points shall 
be worked out on the basis of weighted average of the percentage range 
of grades followed by these institutions as reflected in Table A below:  
TABLE A 
S.No. 
Category 
Range 
Weighted 
Average 
Points of 
PASC @ 
60%= 18 
Points of 
NIPAs @ 
40%=12 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
1. 
A Outstanding 
91 to 100% 
95.50% 
17.19 
11.46 
2. 
B Very Good 
80 to 90% 
85.00% 
15.3 
10.20 
3. 
C Good 
66 to 79% 
72.50% 
13.05 
8.70 
4. 
D Average 
50 to 65% 
57.50% 
10.26 
6.84 
5. 
E Below 
Average 
35 to 49% 
42.00% 
7.56 
5.04 
 
(c) 
grades 
from 
National 
Defence 
University 
shall 
be 
computed 
according to the weighted average based on the grading key for 
the range provided by the NDU as reflected in Table B below:— 
TABLE B 
S.No. 
Category 
Range 
Weighed 
Average 
Points @ 
60%= 18  
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
1. 
A  Outstanding 
76-100% 
88.00% 
15.84 
2. 
B-Plus  Very Good  
66-75.99% 
71.00% 
12.78 
3. 
B-High  Good 
61-65.99% 
63.50% 
11.42 
4. 
B-Average Average 
56-60.99% 
58.50% 
10.52 
5. 
B-Low  Below Average 
51-55.99% 
53.50% 
9.62 
6. 
B-Minus Below Average 
46-50.99% 
48.50% 
8.72 
7. 
C 
Below Average 
40-45.99% 
43.00% 
7.74 
8. 
F 
Below Average 
35-39.99% 
37.50% 
6.74 
 

Page - 654                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
 
(d)  
subsequent to introduction of rationalized grading system by NDU with 
that of NMC grades with effect from the National Security and War 
Course (NSWC) 2012-13, the rationalized result (%age) awarded by the 
NDU shall be taken for quantification of the training evaluation reports 
(TERs) in respect of the officers who undergo NSWC at NDU, provided 
that the previous system of quantifying the TERs on the basis of weighted 
average grading as tabulated in clause(c) shall continue in respect of such 
officers who attend mandatory training at NDU prior to NSWC 2012-13. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 655 
 
 
SCHEDULE-VI 
[See rule 24] 
Guidelines for Ministries, Divisions, Departments and Responsibilities of Departmental 
Representative 
(1) 
The Administrative Ministries, Divisions and Departments shall submit 
their cases of promotion for placing before CSB, DSB or DPC on 
following prescribed forms specimen of which are given at annexures:— 
(i) 
Proposal form (CP-I) 
 
Annex-I 
(ii) 
Panel form (CP-II)  
 
Annex-II 
(iii) 
Synopsis form (CP-III)  
 
Annex-III 
(iv) 
Seniority form (CP-IV)  
 
Annex-IV 
(v) 
Quantification form (CP-V)   
Annex-V 
(2) 
The Administrative Ministries, Divisions and Departments shall ensure 
that documents related to the proposals for promotion are prepared with 
utmost care so that the information submitted to the CSB, DSB and DPC 
complete and accurate in all respects and shall also ensure that: 
(i) 
Proposal form is signed by the Secretary/Additional Secretary 
incharge of the Division.  
(ii) 
Complete recruitment rules are furnished. 
(iii) 
ICP Charts/PER dossiers are complete. Explanation about 
 
the missing reports is available in the dossier and all columns 
 
have been accurately filled in the synopsis form. 
(iv) 
Full particulars of officers are furnished in the seniority list 
 
which is final after circulation, un-disputed, complete and 
  
duly authenticated. 
(v) 
Quantification of PER gradings is correct and quantification 
 
form is enclosed in respect of each officer on the panel. 
(vi) 
Number of clear vacancies is indicated. 
(vii) Training status of the officers on the panel is indicated and training, 
reports are enclosed in respect of each officer on the panel. 
(3) 
The departmental representatives who attend the meetings of the CSB, 
DSB and DPC shall apprise the CSB, DSB and DPC whether or not any 
departmental proceedings or investigations/trial by NAB, FIA, ACE etc. 
are pending against the government servants whose cases are being 
considered by the CSB, DSB and DPC.  
(4) 
Any benefit derived by any person in pursuance of a judgment, 
conviction or sentence passed under section 31A of the National 
Accountability Ordinance, 1999 declared by the Supreme Court as void 
ab-initio, shall not hold the field.  

Page - 656                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
(5) 
While forwarding proposals for consideration of CSB, DSB and DPC the 
administrative Ministries, Divisions and Departments shall provide the 
following additional details and certificates, namely:— 
(a) 
details of penalties, if any, awarded to the officers on the 
 
  
panel during the entire career (BPS-17 and above); 
(b) 
details of punishments under any criminal laws including National 
Accountability Ordinance, 1999, if any, awarded to the officers on 
the panel during the entire career (BPS-17 and above);  
(c) 
certificate to the effect that none of the officers on the panel 
 
 
derived any benefit in pursuance of National Reconciliation 
 
  
Ordinance, 2007 (NRO) in the entire career (BPS-17 and 
 
  
above) within the meaning of the Supreme Court of Pakistan 
 
  
judgment dated 16-12-2009 on NRO; and  
(d) 
certificate to the effect that no punishment has been awarded to any of 
the officers on the panel under any criminal law including National 
Accountability Ordinance, 1999 in the entire career (BPS-17 and 
above). 
  
 
 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 657 
 
 
Annex-I 
PROPOSAL FORM 
Ministry/Division/Department  
1. 
Name of the post(s) to be filled in by promotion 
 
Basic Pay Scale and the Occupational Group/ Ex-
Cadre 
 
2. 
Total sanctioned strength of the cadre 
Direct Promotion Transfer 
(a) 
Percentage of share 
 
(b) 
Number of posts allocated to each category 
 
(c) 
Present occupancy position list of officers to be 
attached 
 
(d) 
Number of vacant post(s) in each category 
 
(e) 
Whether any roster is being maintained for 
allocation to each category? If so, copy to be 
enclosed 
 
(f) 
How the post(s) under promotion quota fell vacant 
and since when? In case of more details separate 
papers be enclosed 
 
(g) 
Whether to be promoted on regular basis or for a 
limited period due to deputation/ long leave etc. 
 
3.  (a) 
Recruitment Rules framed or not. If so, copy to be 
attached  
 
(b) 
In the absence of Recruitment Rules whether the 
method of recruitment got approved by the 
Establishment Division. If so, copy to be attached 
 
(c) 
Person(s) eligible for promotion against vacant 
post(s) 
 
(d) 
Prescribed length of service / experience for 
promotion 
 
(e) 
Prescribed Qualification, if any 
 
(f) 
Mandatory Training /Course, if any 
 
(g) 
Minimum required qualification  
 
4. 
Seniority list(s) duly verified to be attached 
 
5. 
Panel of eligible officer(s) duly signed by a 
responsible officer to be prepared on the 
prescribed form 
 
6. 
Number of PERs/ICP Charts 
 
7. 
Certificate that the officers included in the panel 
are eligible in all respect and possess the required 
length of service required for promotion 
 
8. 
Certificate that no disciplinary action under Govt. 
Servants (E&D) Rules 1973, proceeding on 
criminal charges in the court of law is pending 
against any officer including in the panel. 
 
 
 
                                                          
 Now Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules,2020. 

Page - 658                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
   Annex-II 
 
PANEL PROFORMA FOR CENTRAL SELECTION  
BOARD FOR PROMOTION TO BS-21 POSTS 
(AS ON -------------------) 
 
In respect of __________________ Personnel No.____________ 
 
Domicile: 
Service/Group 
Sen.No.: 
Educational Qualification 
Date of Birth 
Date of Superannuation 
 
 
 
SERVICE PARTICULARS 
Date of joining 
Academy (CSA)/ 
SERVICE 
Date of Promotion in 
Length of Service 
Eligibility for 
consideration 
Present Scale 
BS-20 
Lower Ranks 
Total 
In Present 
Scale 
BS-19 
BS-18 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Important Appointments held in the present Rank/Post: 
1. 
 
2. 
 
3. 
 
4. 
 
5. 
 
 
 
Penalties/Adverse Remarks in BS-20 (if any) 
Training Courses (other than mandatory Training) 
Grading of mandatory trainings at 
 
NMC : 
 
 
 
 
 
NIPA: 
Number of PERs in BS-19 & BS-20 
Basic 
Scale 
Out-
standing 
Very 
Good 
Good Average Below 
Average 
Cumulative 
Period of PERs 
(in month) 
Adverse 
Report/ 
Remarks 
BS-
18/19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BS-20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Awaited Reports 
(PERs) 
Additional Information (if any) 
 
 
EFFICIENCY INDEX 
Required  
Threshold 
Score of PERs + 
Training Reports 
Marks awarded by CSB 
Total 
75 
 
 
 
Recommendation of CSB 
Promoted  
Deferred 
Superseded  
 
 
 
 
 
Prepared by:___________________ 
 
 
Checked by:_______________ 
 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 659 
 
 
 
PANEL PROFORMA FOR 
CENTRAL SELECTION BOARD 
FOR PROMOTION TO BS-20 POSTS 
(AS ON -----------------) 
 
In respect of Mr. 
 
 
            Personnel No.__________ 
 
Domicile: 
Service/Group 
Sen.No. 
Educational Qualification 
Date of Birth 
Date of superannuation 
 
 
 
SERVICE PARTICULARS 
Date of joining 
Academy 
(CSA)/SERVICE 
Date of Promotion in  
Length of Service 
 
Present 
Scale  
BS-19 
Lower Ranks 
Total  
In Present 
Scale 
Eligibility for 
consideration 
BS-18 BS-17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Important Appointments held in the present Rank/Post: 
1. 
 
2. 
 
3. 
 
4. 
 
5. 
 
6. 
 
7. 
 
8. 
 
9. 
 
10. 
 
Extra Ordinary Leave (EOL) (if any): 
Deputation with International Organizations (if any): 
Penalties/Adverse Remarks in BS-19 (If any): 
Training Courses (other than mandatory Training):  
Grading of mandatory trainings at 
 
 
MCMC: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SMC    : 
Number of PERs in BS-17/18 & BS-19 
Basic 
Scale 
Outstanding Very Good Good Average Below 
Average 
Cumulative 
Period of 
PERs (in 
Months) 
Adverse 
Report/Remarks in 
BS-19 
BS-17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BS-18 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BS-19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Awaited PERs 
Additional Information (if any) 
 
Service in the Province of Balochistan  
EFFICIENCY INDEX 
Required 
Threshold 
Score of PERs + Training 
Reports 
Marks awarded by 
CSB 
Total  
70 
 
 
 
Recommendations of CSB 
Promoted  
Deferred 
Superseded  
 
 
 
 
 
Prepared by:___________________ 
   
 
   Checked by:_______________ 

Page - 660                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
Wing Name  
Confidential 
PANEL PROFORMA 
FOR PROMOTION TO BS-19 
(As on 00-00-00) 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 SENIORITY NO __________ 
NAME 
CADRE 
DOMICILE 
PRESENT 
SCALE 
DATE OF 
BIRTH 
XYZ 
- 
- 
BS-18 
- 
Educational Qualification:— 
DATE OF JOINING SERVICE 
LENGTH OF SERVICE IN PRESENT CADRE 
 i) 
In other Group/Service/Cadre 
ii) 
in present Cadre in BS-17 
iii) Date of Promotion in BS-18 
  
In BS-17  
- Years – Months 
In BS-18            
-  Years –Months 
Total service 
-   Years- Months 
 
EOL in BS _______  00 Years 00 Months 
Net Service                Years Months      
Important Appointments held in the BS-17/18 Rank/Post: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Penalties imposed under E & D rules (if any): 
GRADING OF MCMC:— 
GRADING/QUANTIFICATION OF PERS IN BS-18. 
Basic 
Scale 
Out-standing 
Very 
Good 
Good  
Average 
Below Average 
Adverse 
Report/ 
Remarks 
BS-
18 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Awaited Reports (PERs) 
Additional Information (if any) 
- 
Fresh 
EFFICIENCY INDEX 
Required Threshold 
Score of PERs + 
Training Reports 
Marks awarded by DSB 
Total  
65 
PER+ Training = 
 
 
Recommendations of DSB 
Promoted 
Deferred 
Superseded 
 
 
 
 
____________  
 
 
 
              _________________ 
    Prepared by 
 
 
 
 
                             Checked by   
 
 
 
 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 661 
 
 
PANEL PROFORMA  
CONFIDENTIAL 
FOR PROMOTION TO BS-18  
 
                                                                                                                 
 
 SENIORITY NO.________________ 
 
                                                                                                                        AS ON 00-00-00 
NAME   
      SERVICE/GROUP  
DOMICILE 
DATE OF JOINING  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OF SERVICE 
 
Date of Birth: 
Date of Superannuation :— 
 
Educational Qualification :— 
 
QUANTIFIED SCORE OF PERS 
 
Prescribed  
Threshold  
PER Score 
Adverse Remarks 
Awaited Reports 
60 
- 
- 
- 
 
Conditions of Eligibility 
Length of Service (5 years):  
 
Required (5 Years)  
Clearance of FPOE: 
 
 
Required to be cleared 
 
Probationary Period: 
 
 
need to be terminated 
Minimum Threshold  
 
 
*60 Marks 
 
EOL availed during service: 
If on deputation/training abroad, period thereof 
Penalties imposed under E&D Rules, if any: 
 
Postings Held: 
 
 
Note:—  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
 Substituted vide Establishment Division S.R.O No. 58(I)/2020 dated 25-01-2020. 

Page - 662                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
Annex-III 
SYNOPSIS OF PERs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                        
Seniority No.  
 
Name of the Officer 
: Mr. ………………   (Group/Service) …………………….. 
Educational Qualification   : …………………………. 
 
Year 
Posting 
Overall 
Grading 
Fitness of 
Promotion 
Pen Picture 
Reporting officer 
(with Name and Designation) 
Countersigning 
Officer (With Name 
and Designation) 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
 
 
 
 
PERFORMANCE 
 
 
INTEGRITY 
 
 
 
PEN PICTURE  
 
SPECIAL APTITUDE/ 
AREA OF 
PROFESSIONAL 
EXPTERTISE 
 
TRAINING AND 
DEVELOPMENT NEEDS: 
 
Sd/- 
Reporting Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-Sd- 
Counter Signing 
Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 663 
 
 
Annex-IV 
SENIORITY LIST 
Sl. 
No. 
Name 
of 
Officer 
Domicile Promotee/ 
Direct 
Date of 
Birth 
Date of first 
appointment 
in Govt. 
service 
Date of 
regular 
appointment 
in Basic Pay 
Scale-17 
Date of 
regular 
appointment 
in present 
pay scale 
Present 
posting 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
(8) 
(9) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Signature ____________________ 
       Designation__________________ 
                                                                       Date________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page - 664                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
Annex-V 
For Promotion to BS-21  
 
PER GRADING & QUANTIFICATION FORM 
 
Name:— MR. 
 
              (Group/BS-------) 
                 Seniority No.  
Date of Birth: 00-00-0000 
Year Post held Min/Div/Deptt 
Period of PER 
PER’s 
Assessment 
Fitness 
for promotion 
Score 
From 
To 
By 
RO 
By 
CO 
Previous Scale (BS-18) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Aggregate Score = 
 
Previous Scale (BS-19) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Aggregate Score = 
 
Present Scale (BS-20) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Aggregate Score = 
 
 
                                                          
 Substituted vide Establishment Division S.R.O No. 58(I)/2020 dated 25-01-2020. 
CALCULATION OF SCORE 
 
A:PERs 
Quantification 
Score 
60:40 
@ 40% 
Basic Scale 
Aggregate 
Score 
Weightage 
Factor 
Points 
Obtained 
Present Scale 
 
0.24 
 
Previous scale 
 
0.16* 
 
Additions (if any) 
 
 
 
Deletions (if any) 
 
 
 
Total:— 
 
 
 
B:             
Training : 
@ 30% 
NMC/NDU 
 
0.18* 
 
SMC 
 
0.12* 
 
LHR 
KAR 
IBD 
PSH 
 
 
 
Total : 70% 
Total : (A + B) 
 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 665 
 
 
For Promotion to BS-20 
PER GRADING & QUANTIFICATION FORM 
Name:— MR. 
 
                (Group/BS-------)                    Seniority No.  
 
Date of Birth: 00-00-0000 
Year Post held 
Min/Div/Deptt 
Period of PER 
PER’s 
Assessment 
Fitness 
for promotion 
Score 
From 
To 
By 
RO 
By 
CO 
Previous Scale (BS-17) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Aggregate Score = 
 
Previous Scale (BS-18) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Aggregate Score = 
 
Present Scale (BS-19) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Aggregate Score = 
 
 
CALCULATION OF SCORE 
 
A:PERs 
Quantification 
Score: 
60:40 
@ 40% 
Basic Scale 
Aggregate 
Score 
Weightage 
Factor 
Points 
Obtained 
Present Scale 
 
0.24 
 
Previous scale 
 
0.16* 
 
Additions (if any) 
 
 
 
Deletions (if any) 
 
 
 
Total:— 
 
 
 
B:   Training:  
       @ 30% 
SMC 
 
0.18* 
 
MCMC 
 
0.12* 
 
LHR 
KAR 
QTA 
PSH 
 
 
 
Total : 70% 
Total : (A + B) 
 
 
 
                                                          
Substituted vide Establishment Division S.R.O No. 58(I)/2020 dated 25-01-2020. 

Page - 666                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
For Promotion to BS-19  
PER GRADING & QUANTIFICATION FORM 
 
Name:— MR. 
 
          (Group---------/BS-------) 
               Seniority No.  
Date of Birth: 00-00-0000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
 Substituted vide Establishment Division S.R.O No. 58(I)/2020 dated 25-01-2020. 
Year Post held Min/Div/Deptt 
Period of PER 
PER’s 
Assessment 
Fitness 
for promotion 
Score 
From 
To 
By RO By CO 
Previous Scale (BS-17) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Aggregate Score = 
 
Present Scale (BS-18) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Aggregate Score = 
 
CALCULATION OF SCORE 
 
A:PERs 
Quantification 
Score           
        60:40 
       @40% 
Basic Scale 
Aggregate Score 
Weightage 
Factor 
Points 
Obtained 
Present Scale 
 
0.24 
 
Previous scale 
 
0.16* 
 
Additions (if any) 
 
 
 
Deletions (if any) 
 
 
 
Total:— 
 
 
 
B:  Training: 
     @ 30% 
 
 
 
 
MCMC 
 
0.30* 
 
LHR 
KAR 
QTA 
PSH 
 
 
 
Total : 70% 
Total : (A + B) 
 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 667 
 
 
For Promotion to BS-18  
PER GRADING & QUANTIFICATION FORM 
Name:— MR. 
 
         (Group---------/BS-------) 
  Seniority No. __________ 
 
Date of Birth: 00-00-0000 
 
Year Post held 
Min/Div/Deptt 
Period of PER 
PER’s 
Assessment 
Fitness 
for promotion 
Score 
From 
To 
By RO By CO 
Present Scale (BS-17) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Aggregate Score = 
 
       
CALCULATION OF SCORE 
 
PERs Quantified 
Score: 
      @ 100 % 
Basic Scale 
Aggregate 
Score 
Weightage 
Factor 
Points 
Obtained 
Present Scale 
 
1.00 
 
Additions (if any) 
 
 
 
Deletions (if any) 
 
 
 
Total:— 
 
 
 
Total : 100% 
                                                  Total : (A) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page - 668                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
 
4.1 
Other Posts in the Federal Secretariat,  
 
 
Attached Departments and Subordinate Offices 
 
It has been decided that, with the exception of posts of– 
(i) 
Assistant Secretary; 
(ii) 
Administrative Officer; 
(iii) Cashier; and 
(iv) Personal Assistants to Ministers and Stenographers to Secretaries, Joint 
Secretaries and other officers which carry special pay which should be 
treated as selection posts, the various posts in the Ministerial Establishment 
and Class IV Service in the Pakistan Federal Secretariat (Ministries and 
Divisions) and its Attached Departments, should be treated as non-selection 
posts i.e., posts to which promotion should be made according to the 
principle of ―seniority-cum- fitness‖.  For this purpose, it is essential that the 
standard of fitness should be a very high one.  The decision contained in this 
Office Memorandum should apply to vacancies which are filled from the 
date of this Office Memorandum. 
 
2. 
............... Omitted.............. 
 
3. 
If there are any posts in the Secretariat and its Attached Departments 
corresponding to the posts of Assistant Secretaries or Administrative Officers, the 
question whether they should be treated as selection posts should be decided in 
consultation with the Establishment Division. 
 
4. 
It is requested that posts in Subordinate Offices should also be classified 
as selection and non-selection posts by the Ministries concerned, in the light of the 
instructions contained in this Office Memorandum since it is necessary that the position 
in this respect should be placed on definite and regular footing, as early as possible. 
[Authority:– Cabinet Secretariat, Estt. Branch O.M.No.54/2/49-Ests.(ME), dated 3-4-1950]. 
 
4.2 
Appointment of Council Assistant 
 
Reference.– Establishment Division Office Memorandum No. 1/29/56-ME, dated 
the 25th April, 1956. 
 
2. 
Council Assistant.– The majority of the replies received in the Establishment 
Division agree that:- 
(a) 
Council Assistant should be appointed from among Assistants only, and that, 
(b) 
the appointment of Council Assistants should be made by ‗Selection‘. 
                                                          
 Now Assistant Private Secretary. 
 Note.- BPS 1 & 2 Appointment of Jamadars attached to Ministers are made by selection from amongst the 
Naib Quasids employed in the Ministry/Division concerned at the discretion of the Minister-in-Charge vide 
Establishment Division Office Memorandum No. 54/4/51-ME, dated 2-6-1951. 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 669 
 
 
 
3. 
The above views have been accepted by the Establishment Division. If, 
however, suitable Assistants in a Ministry/Division are not available for employment as 
Council Assistants, Upper Division Clerks may also be considered for employment as such. 
 
4.  
Ministries/Divisions are requested to make all further appointments of 
Council Assistant in the light of the above decision. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M.No. 1/29/56-ME, dated 25-4-1957]. 
Sl.No.5 
General Instructions Regarding Promotions 
 
Sequence in departmental promotions and direct recruitment.- 
Reference.- Establishment Division‘s Office Memorandum No. 15/38/52-SEII, dated the 
22nd June, 1953 (Annex). 
 
2. 
The replies received from the Ministries and Divisions on the suggestions 
contained in the above Memorandum have been considered and, in order to ensure that 
candidates rejected by the Federal Public Service Commission in open competition or 
selection should not be absorbed in vacancies meant for departmental quotas, it has been 
decided that the following procedure should be adopted in future:- 
(i) 
where a cadre has definite quotas reserved for departmental promotions 
and direct recruitment, promotions against the departmental quota should 
be made first and the posts reserved for direct recruitment filled later.  
These orders, however, will have no effect on those cadres where 
recruitment is made solely by direct recruitment or where all appointments 
are made only by promotion; 
(ii) 
necessary provision regarding the above should be made in all recruitment 
rules already framed or framed hereafter; and 
(iii) in the case of isolated posts, a roster should be maintained in each 
Ministry and Division to ensure the observance of the prescribed 
percentage for departmental promotions and direct recruitment. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.15/38/52-SE II, dated 29-1-1954]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page - 670                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
(ANNEX) 
 
[Copy of Establishment Division O.M. No. 15/38/52-SE II, dated the  
22nd June, 1953] 
 
In the case of services and cadres in which under the prescribed recruitment rules a 
certain percentage of vacancies is reserved for departmental promotion and the remainder for 
direct recruitment, no uniform procedure is followed as to the sequence in which these 
vacancies should be filled, that is, whether promotions should be made first and direct 
recruitment made later or vice versa. The Establishment Division have been considering the 
question of laying down a uniform procedure in this matter and have tentatively come to the 
conclusion that it would be an advantage both from the point of view of the department as 
well as the candidates if promotions are made first and vacancies reserved for direct 
recruitment filled later. There are, however, advantages and disadvantages on both sides, and 
these are discussed below: 
(i) 
Promotions to departmental quota to be made first and direct recruitment 
made later: 
 
Under this system the department concerned can straight away promote the 
suitable departmental candidates and, having done so, intimate the vacancies meant for 
direct recruitment to the Federal Public Service Commission. If all the vacancies reserved 
for promotion cannot be filled due to the dearth of suitable departmental candidates the 
balance can, if necessary, be added to those reserved for direct recruitment. This system 
assures promotion to the candidates working in the department according to the principle 
of seniority-cum-fitness without undue delay and they are not left in suspense as to 
whether or not they should apply to the Commission. If any of the departmental 
candidates are superseded in departmental promotion, they still have a chance to compete 
with outside candidates and may, thereby, be selected as being more suitable in 
comparison with such candidates. This system, therefore, assures promotion to 
departmental candidates without their having to wait till the vacancies, etc., are 
advertised by the Commission, while those superseded in departmental promotion can 
still appear before the Commission. 
 
A further advantage from the point of view of departmental men is that they 
will rank senior to outside candidates selected through direct recruitment as their 
appointments can be finalized earlier than those of the later. 
 
A disadvantage which might result from this system is that it may not always be 
possible in actual practice to follow it due to the exigencies of service which may, in 
certain cases, necessitate direct recruitment being made first and appointments by 
departmental promotion later.  Such cases, as far as can be seen, are likely to be rare and on 
the whole it appears that there are definite advantages in following the system whereby 
recruitment against the departmental quota should precede that through open selection. 
(ii) 
Recruitment by open selection to be made first and by departmental 
promotions later: 
                                                          
 employees; candidates. 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 671 
 
 
 
One of the results of this procedure will be that larger number of open vacancies 
will go to departmental candidates in as much as they will be able in the first place to 
compete with outsiders in open selection and be approved by the Commission on the 
basis of their long experience and knowledge of the department. Those who are not 
selected in the open selection can again be considered for departmental promotion and 
receive promotion according to departmental seniority. This system, however, is bound to 
result in deterioration of efficiency since those who are not considered fit by the 
Commission can still be appointed to higher posts by departmental promotion and the 
advantage of having fresh blood in the service which the open selection quota in a service 
is intended to provide will be seriously jeopardized. Apart from the resultant 
deterioration, this system has a further grave objection inasmuch as a person rejected by 
the Commission would still be able to secure a like post through departmental promotion. 
 
2. 
The Federal Public Service Commission, who raised this matter, have 
suggested that departments should first promote the deserving individuals against the 
quota fixed for promotion and then throw open the remaining posts for open competition. 
In accordance with this procedure, no one who has been rejected by the Commission or 
has not faced any competition will be promoted.  This is evidently sound in principle.       
             3. 
Considering all the facts, the Establishment Division are of the view that 
the alternative at (i) above has definite advantages from the point of view of efficiency in 
public service and the safeguarding of the legitimate interests of the departmental 
candidates and they are, therefore, inclined to issue orders for its adoption by all 
Ministries/ Divisions/Departments. Before, however, a final decision is taken, Ministries 
and Divisions are requested kindly to favour the Establishment Division with their views 
in the matter. 
 
6.1 
Minimum Length of Service for Eligibility  
for Promotion to Posts in Various BPS 
 
In pursuance of rule 8-A of the Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and 
Transfer) Rules, 1973 and in supersession of the instructions laid down in the Establishment 
Division‘s O.M.No.1/9/80 R.II(A), dated the 12th January, 1981, (Annex), the President is 
pleased to decide that the minimum length of service for promotion to various grades shall 
be as follows:- 
-  For BS 18 
 
 
5 years in BS 17 
-  For BS 19 
     
 
12 years in BS 17 and above 
-  For BS 20 
 
 
17 years in BS 17 and above 
-  For BS 21 
 
 
22 years in BS 17 and above 
 
-  *For BS 22 
25 years in BS 17 & above and   
02 years in BS 21 
 
Provided that:- 
(i) 
Where initial appointment of a person not being a person in government 
service, takes place in a post in BPS 18, 19 or 20, the length of service 
                                                          
* Amended vide Notification 7/1/2010. CP.6 and S.R.O 798(I)/2010 dated 16-08-2010. 

Page - 672                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
specified in this Office Memorandum shall be reduced by the following 
periods; 
 
First appointment in 
 
 
Reduced by 
 
 
BPS-18 
 
 
 
5 years 
 
 
BPS-19 
 
 
 
12 years 
 
 
BPS-20 
 
 
 
17 years 
(ii) 
Where initial appointment of a person already in government service takes 
place, on recommendations of the Federal Public Service Commission, in a 
post in BPS 18, 19 or 20, the length of service specified in this Office 
Memorandum shall be reduced by the periods specified in proviso (i); 
(iii) Where first appointment of a person other than a person covered by proviso 
(ii) was made to government service in BPS 16 or below, one-half of the 
service in BPS 16 and one fourth in BPS 15 and below may be counted as 
service in BPS 17 for computing length of service for the purpose of 
promotion only. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.1/9/80-R.2 dated 2-6-1983]. 
ANNEX 
 
[Copy of O.M.No.1/9/80-R-II(A),dated 12th January, 1981]. 
 
Reference Establishment Division O.M. No. 3/7/74-AR. II, dated 20th May, 1974, 
27th August, 1974 and 6th February, 1975, in supersession of the instructions laid down in the 
aforementioned O.M. the President is pleased to decide that the minimum length of service 
for promotion to various grades shall be as follows:— 
-  For BPS 18 
 
5 years in BPS 17. 
-  For BPS 19 
 
12 years in BPS 17 and above. 
-  For BPS 20 
 
17 years in BPS 17 and above. 
-  For BPS 21 
 
22 years in BPS 17 and above. 
 
Provided that where initial appointment takes place in Grades 18, 19 and 20, the 
length of service for promotion to higher *Grades shall be as follows, namely:— 
 
-  For BPS 19 
 
7 years in BPS 18 
 
 
-  For BPS 20 
 
12 years in BPS 18 and above or  
5 years in BPS 19 
 
-  For BPS 21  
 
17 years in BPS 18 and above or 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 years in BPS 20. 
                                                          
The proviso (iii) was substituted vide Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.4/2/2008-CP-69(Pt) dated 18-12-2008, then 
consequent upon the recommendations of Senate Standing Committee on Cabinet Secretariat (Establishment 
Division), Inter-Provincial Coordination and Special Initiatives, Establishment Division‘s above referred O.M. 
has been withdrawn vide Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.1/9/80-R-II dated 3rd March,2010. The Status of proviso (iii) 
above is restored to its previous position as of on 02-06-1983.  
 BPS. 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 673 
 
 
 
6.2 
Counting of Ad-Hoc Service for  
the Purpose of Promotion 
 
Under the existing rules, ad-hoc service does not reckon for the purpose of 
seniority. A point has since been raised whether ad-hoc service rendered in a post followed 
by regular appointment to that post may be allowed to be computed towards length of service 
prescribed for promotion to a higher post. The matter has been considered in the 
Establishment Division.  It has been decided that the service rendered on ad-hoc basis in a 
post under the Federal Government, followed by regular appointment to a post in the same 
pay scale shall be counted towards length of service prescribed for promotion to a higher post 
provided there is no break between ad-hoc and regular appointments to the post concerned. 
 
2. 
The above decision may be brought to the notice of all departments/ 
organizations under the administrative control of Ministries/ Divisions. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.10/22/83-R.2, dated 20-3-1988]. 
 
6.3 
Counting of Service Rendered Against Higher Post 
Under Section 10 of the Civil Servants Act, 1973 
 
Section 10 of the Civil Servants Act, 1973 reads as under:— 
 
―10. Posting and transfer:—Every civil servant shall be liable to serve 
anywhere within or outside Pakistan in any equivalent or higher post under the 
Federal Government or any Provincial Government or local authority or a 
corporation or body set up or established by any such Government; 
 
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to a civil servant 
recruited specifically to serve in a particular area or region. 
 
Provided further that where a civil servant is required to serve in a post outside 
his service or cadre his terms and conditions of service as to his pay shall not be less 
favourable than those to which he would have been entitled if he had not been so required 
to serve‖. 
 
2. 
A point was raised how the service rendered by a civil servant posted 
against a higher post under Section 10 of the Civil Servants Act, 1973 would be counted 
for the purpose of promotion to higher post of the said civil servant. 
 
3. 
The matter has been given careful consideration in the Establishment 
Division. It has been observed that according to section 5 of the Civil Servants Act, 1973 
all appointments are required to be made in the prescribed manner i.e. on the 
recommendations of appropriate Departmental Promotion / Selection Committee (s) or 
Board(s), as the case may be, and with the approval of the designated appointing authorities 
followed by a notification promoting such civil servant to higher BPS.  
 
4. 
Section 10 of the Civil Servants Act, 1973 is a liability provision i.e. a 
civil servant is liable to serve in an equivalent or higher post. Promotion to a higher post 
and holding temporary charge of a post are two different aspects. Legally, a person is not 
in a higher grade until his promotion to the higher post is duly notified and charge of the 
higher post is formally assumed by him. 

Page - 674                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
 
5. 
It has, therefore, been decided that the service rendered by a civil servant 
against higher post under Section 10 of the Civil Servants Act, 1973 cannot be treated at 
par with the service rendered by regularly promoted officers in the higher scale for the 
purpose of promotion to the next higher grade. 
 
6. 
The decision may be brought to the notice of all concerned. 
[Authority: Estab. Div.‘s OM No. 3/40/2007-R-2, dated 12th Nov., 2007] 
 
6.4 
Length of Service for Promotion from  
BPS-16 to BPS-18 Where There is No  
Intermediate Post in BPS-17 
 
The minimum length of service for promotion to BPS 18 and above was laid down 
vide Establishment Division‘s Office Memorandum No.1/9/80-R.II, dated 12th January, 1981 
(Sl.No.6.1 Annex). The question as to what should be the length of service for promotion 
from BPS 16 to BPS 18 where there is no intermediate post in BPS 17 has been considered 
and it has been decided, with the approval of the President, that in such cases the minimum 
length of service laid down in the recruitment rules relating to posts in BPS 18 for the 
purpose of promotion from BPS 16 to BPS 18 should be kept as the basis for such 
promotions. 
 
2. 
In case there is no such provision in the recruitment rules, action should be 
taken by the respective Ministry/Division to include such a provision in the recruitment rules. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.1/9/80-R.2, dated 4-5-1982]. 
 
6.5 
Possession of Prescribed Minimum  
Length of Service Does Not Confer a  
Right to Promotion Over Senior Persons 
 
The prescribed minimum length of service is a condition for eligibility for 
promotion and does not confer a right to promotion. Where a senior person has not done 
prescribed service, the junior, as a rule, should not be considered even if he fulfills the 
prescribed length of service condition. 
 
2. 
Even for ―selection‖ post, the persons have to be considered in the order of 
their seniority. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s U.O. No.1/21/75-D.II. dated 9-7-1975]. 
6.6 
Grant of BPS-17 to the Superintendent (BPS-16) in the Federal 
Government Ministries/Divisions/Attached Departments/Sub-ordinate 
Offices. 
 
Prime Minister has been pleased to accord approval to the grant of higher time scale 
to the Superintendents (BPS-16) in the Federal Government Ministries/ Divisions/Attached 
Departments/Subordinate Offices with immediate effect as under:— 
(a) 
One time grant of BPS-17 to all Superintendents working in BPS-16 
irrespective of their length of service. 
(b) 
In future three(03) years satisfactory service as Superintendent BPS-16 may 
be prescribed for grant of BPS-17 to them. 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 675 
 
 
 
2. 
The grant of higher time scale will be subject to the following terms and 
conditions:— 
(i) 
The recruitment rules, nomenclature/tier of the posts and seniority of the 
Superintendents shall remain intact. 
(ii) 
The grant of higher time scale will be subject to fitness of candidate and 
recommendations of the relevant DPC. 
(iii) On grant of higher time scale pay will be fixed at the next above stage in 
BPS-17 and no pre-mature increment is admissible. 
(iv) On grant of higher time scale there shall be no change in the entitlement/ 
admissibility of rental ceiling/House Rent Allowance/ Medical Allowance.   
[Authority:– Finance Division (Reg. Wing) O.M. No.1(3) R-I/2010/2014 dated 10-9-2014]. 
 
7.1 
Setting-Up of the Departmental Promotion Committees  
 
 
for Promotion to Posts Upto and Including BPS 18 
 
For promotion to BPS upto and including 18 and direct recruitment to posts in 
grades 1 to 15, the Ministries/Divisions will set up one or more Departmental Selection 
Committees and Departmental Promotion Committees the composition of which will be 
determined by the Ministry/Division concerned in consultation with the Establishment 
Division. Proposals for composition of Departmental Selection and Departmental Promotion 
Committees in respect of each Ministry/Division and Departments and offices under its 
administrative control may be forwarded to the Establishment Division. Broadly, the 
composition of the Committees should be as follows:— 
Sl. 
No. 
BPS 
Composition of the Committee 
Remarks 
(i) 
Departmental 
Promotion 
Committee for BPS 17 
and 18. 
Secretary or Additional Secretary, a 
Joint Secretary and a Senior Deputy 
Secretary. If the posts are in an 
Attached Department or a Sub-
ordinate Office, the Head of the 
Attached Department or Head of 
Office may be appointed as Member 
in lieu of Joint Secretary/Deputy 
Secretary. 
There should preferably be 
one D.P.C. for posts in BPS 
17 and BPS 18 for the 
Ministry/Division and the 
Attached Departments and 
Subordinate Offices under 
it. 
(ii) 
Departmental Selection or 
Departmental Promotion 
Committees for BPS 11 
to 16. 
 
An officer of BPS 20 and two 
officers of BPS 19.  
 
        
There may be separate 
Committees for posts in the 
Ministry/Division 
and 
Attached 
Departments/ 
Subordinate Offices under 
the Ministry/ Division. 
(iii) 
Departmental Selection or 
Departmental Promotion 
Committees for BPS 10 
and below. 
An officer of BPS 19 and two 
officers of BPS 18. 
 
[Authority:– Extract from para 6 of Estt. Secretary‘s d.o. letter No.1/9/73-F.IV, dated 22-10-1973]. 

Page - 676                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
7.2 
Composition of Departmental  
Promotion/Selection Committees 
  
According to rule-4 (1) of the Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and 
Transfer) Rules 1973, the composition of a Departmental Promotion/Selection Committee is 
to be determined by the Ministry or Division concerned in consultation with the 
Establishment Division. However, the level at which the composition is to be approved in 
the Ministry concerned has not been specified. 
 
2.  
It has, therefore, been decided that composition of the Departmental 
Promotion Committee for BPS 11 to 18 may be approved at the level of Secretary of a 
Ministry/Division and the composition of Departmental Promotion Committees for BPS 10 
and below may be approved by the Joint Secretary.  Each Secretary may, in his Division, 
authorize Joint Secretary (Admn) in respect of Departmental Promotion/Selection 
Committees for BPS 10 and below. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s Letter No. 26/1/80-DV, dated 12-10-1980]. 
 
7.3 
Post in BPS 18 Which Carry Special Pay 
 
It is stated that the proviso to rule 7 of the Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion 
and Transfer) Rules, 1973 requiring that posts in BPS 18 which carry a special pay would 
also be referred to the Central Selection Board if proposed to be filled by promotion or 
transfer has since been deleted vide Establishment Division‘s Notification No. S.R.O. 
46(I)/84, dated 9th February, 1984.  It is clarified that all cases in which a post in Basic Pay 
Scale 18 carrying some special pay is filled by promotion will be placed before the 
appropriate Departmental Promotion Committee*.  Where post in Pay Scale 18 carrying a 
special pay does not fall in the promotion ladder, it would be filled by departmental heads 
through normal posting and transfer. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 3/6/84-R. 2 dated. 3-7-1984]. 
 
7.4 
DPC Not Competent to Recommend Demotion 
 
It appears from references made recently to the Establishment Division that the 
scope and functions of Departmental Promotion Committees are not clearly understood.  In 
certain cases Government servants officiating without any condition in higher BPS have been 
demoted on the recommendation of Departmental Promotion Committees. It is necessary, 
therefore, that the position should be clarified. 
 
2.  
As their name indicates, the function of Departmental Promotion 
Committees is to make recommendations in respect of promotions and there is nothing in 
Establishment Division Office Memorandum No. 33/l/47-Ests(SE.II), dated the 29th January, 
1948 which relates to the constitution of these Committees, to suggest that these Committees 
have been given the power to recommend the demotion of an officiating officer. 
                                                          
*BPS. Promotion is to posts/BPS. 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 677 
 
 
 
3.  
What Departmental Promotion Committees should do is to prepare a list 
of officers whom they consider fit for promotion. They should revise this list periodically 
which means that they can either add to, or substract from it. An officer who has been 
substantively promoted to a higher BPS will not of course figure in this list.  Similarly, an 
officer who has been promoted to officiate in a substantive vacancy for an indefinite 
period should not appear in the list because he is for all practical purposes to continue in 
the higher BPS.  In other words, the officers whose names will be shown in the list 
maintained by these Committees will be those who have not been promoted to higher 
BPS in any capacity or who have officiated off and on or who are officiating against 
leave vacancies or in temporary posts of short duration and are, therefore, liable to revert 
in the normal course to the lower BPS. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. F. 33/49-SE, dated 18-6-1949]. 
 
7.5 
Names of the Selected Persons to be  
Arranged in the Order of Seniority 
 
In accordance with the Establishment Division Office Memorandum No. 
1/16/69-D.II, dated 31st December, 1970, regarding general principles of seniority, 
persons approved by the competent authority, on regular basis for promotion to higher 
posts in the same batch shall retain the same seniority on the higher BPS as they were 
enjoying in the lower grade. 
[Authority:– Para 1 of Estt. Division‘s O.M.No. 13/1/67-D.III, dated 15-7-1972]. 
 
7.6 
DPC can Interview Candidates 
 
The question of interviewing candidates, by Departmental Promotion Committee, at 
the time their cases for promotion are being considered, has been examined in this Division, 
and it has been decided that a DPC can interview the candidates, if it so desires. 
[Authority:– Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.13/l/69-D.III, dated 25-3-1969]. 
 
7.7 
Minutes of the DPC 
 
The proceedings of the Departmental Promotion Committees are very often 
drawn up in a sketchy manner and do not give the essential details. 
 
2. 
It is necessary that detailed minutes should be drawn up to show why certain 
persons have been approved and what are the reasons for declaring certain other persons unfit 
for promotion.  In promotion for selection posts, mere average reports should not be 
considered sufficient and greater emphasis should be placed on merit according to the existing 
instructions. 
 
 
[Authority:– Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.13/1/69-D.III, dated 3-11-1970]. 
7.8 
Composition of Departmental Selection Board (DSB) 
for Promotion of Federal Civil Servants from BS-18 
to BS-19 
 
In terms of Section 2(1)(h) of Civil Servants Act,1973 read with Rule-2 (b) of 
the Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules,1973, and under Rule 
3(1) of Civil Servants Promotion (BS-18 to BS-19) Rules,2019, the Prime Minister has 

Page - 678                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
approved the following composition of Departmental Selection Board (DSB) for 
promotion of Federal Civil Servants from BS-18 to BS-19 under the Federal 
Government:—  
(1) 
Secretary of the Administrative Ministry/  
Chairman 
 
Division concerned. 
 
(2) 
A representative of Establishment Division  
Member 
 
not below BS 21. 
(3) 
Head of the respective Department in case  
Member 
 
of posts in Attached Departments and 
 
Subordinate Offices.  
(4) 
Chief Secretaries of Provincial Governments 
Members 
 
for cases of PAS/PSP and Inspector Generals of  
 
Police for cases of PSP officers. 
 
(5) 
A representative of Law Division not below  
Member 
 
BPS 21 
(6) 
Additional Secretary or Senior Joint Secretary 
Member/ 
 
or Joint Secretary of the Division concerned,  
Secretary 
with approval of Chairman of the Board. 
 
2. 
The quorum of DSB may be considered complete only when at least 75% 
of members as per proposed composition are in attendance. However, in exceptional 
circumstances, and only after the prior approval of chairman of DSB, a senior 
representative of a member may attend on his behalf.  
 
3. 
Any DSB proceedings held in absence of representative of Establishment 
Division will be considered void ab-initio.  
 
[Authority: Estt. Div.‘s Notification No. 6/2/2021-CP-III, dated 21st April, 2021] 
7.9 
Proposals for Central Selection Board – Prescribed 
Forms and Check List (March, 1990) 
 
Deficiencies have been occasionally noticed in the documents sent for submission 
of promotion proposals to the Central Selection Boards. It will be appreciated that 
submission of complete and accurate documents (including the correctly calculated 
quantified scores of PERs) is a pre-requisite for consideration of promotion cases by the 
Boards. 
 
2. 
A set of the following prescribed forms is given as specimen, indicating the 
number of copies required, so that the Ministries/ Divisions/Departments concerned may be 
able to submit complete proposals for promotion:- 
 
(i) 
Proposal form 
 
(CP-I) One copy. 
 
(ii) 
Panel form 
 
(CP-II) 20 Copies. 
 
(iii) Synopsis form 
 
(CP-III) 20 Copies. 
 
(iv) Seniority form 
 
(CP-IV) One copy for  
 
 
 
 
each proposal. 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 679 
 
 
 
(v)   Quantification form 
 
(CP-V) One copy for  
 
 
 
 
 
each officer on the panel. 
 
 
[   ] 
 
 
3. 
It is requested that the required number of copies of these forms, cyclostyled 
or photo copied legibly, must be attached to each proposal for promotion. 
 
4. 
For each vacancy, a panel of at least five eligible officers is required.  
However, in case of smaller cadres where only a few officers are eligible for promotion, 
complete list, in order of seniority, of all the eligible officers should be enclosed. 
 
5. 
 A check list has been drawn up and enclosed for the guidance of the 
Ministries/Divisions/Departments. 
 
6. 
Instructions already issued vide Establishment Division‘s O.M.No.45/1/88-
CP-3(Pt), dated 13th January, 1988 shall be treated to have been amended to the extent 
mentioned above. 
 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.45/6/90-CP.3, dated 3-3-1990]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
CP Forms No. vi, vii and viii excluded vide Estt. Div. OM No. 45/1/88-CP.3, dated 10-3-1999. 

Page - 680                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
CHECK LIST OF REQUIREMENTS REGARDING  
PROPOSALS FOR PROMOTION OF OFFICERS 
 
To ensure that:-  
(a) 
the proposal form (CP-I) has been signed by the Secretary/Additional 
Secretary Incharge of the Division; 
(ii) 
for each vacancy a panel of at least five officers has been submitted and all 
columns have been accurately filled in the form (CP-II); 
(iii) training status of the officers on the panel has been indicated  
(CP-II);  
(iv) ICP Charts/CR dossiers are complete, explanation about the missing 
reports is available in the dossiers and all columns have been accurately 
filled in the synopsis form (CP-III); 
(v) 
seniority list is un-disputed, complete and duly authenticated and indicates 
full particulars of officers (CP-IV); 
(vi) quantification of PER gradings is correct and quantification form is enclosed 
in respect of each officer on the panel (CP-V);  
(vii) a copy of relevant Recruitment Rules has been furnished; and 
(viii) requisite number of copies of each form has been sent with the proposal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 681 
 
 
7.10 
Proposal for Central Selection Board –  
Revised Forms (March, 1999) 
 
Reference Establishment Division‘s O.M. of even number dated 13.1.1988 with 
which different forms required to accompany the proposals for promotion were circulated. In 
view of the past experience the Proposal Form (CP-I) and Panel Form (CP-II) have been 
revised. In the light of the revised Proposal Form (CP-I), the following documents will not 
be required to be attached separately in future:- 
(i)  
Vacancies certificate form. 
(CP-VI) 
(ii)  Disciplinary/Court case certificate form. 
(CP-VII) 
(iii) Prescribed length of service certificate form 
(CP-VIII) 
 
2. 
In view of the above, all Ministries/Divisions/ Departments are requested to 
bring the above position to the notice of all concerned and in future the promotion cases may 
please be prepared on the revised Proposal Form (CP-I) and Panel Form (CP-II) and sent to 
the Establishment Division alongwith the following documents for consideration by the CSB 
concerned:- 
(i) 
Synopsis Form 
 (CP-III) 
(ii) 
Seniority Form 
(CP-IV) 
(iii) Quantification Form 
(CP-V) 
[Authority:– Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.45/1/88-CP.3, dated 10-3-1999]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page - 682                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
CP-I 
PROPOSAL FORM 
 
Ministry/Division/Department 
 
1. 
Name of the post(s) to be 
------------------------------------------
filled in by promotion   
------------------------------------------- 
 
Basic Pay Scale and the  
------------------------------------------- 
 
Occupational Group/  
------------------------------------------- 
 
Ex-cadre. 
 
2. 
Total sanctioned strength of  
 
the cadre. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                    __                _        
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Direct   Promotion  Transfer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                            
 
 
(a) 
Percentage of share. 
                                            
 
 
(b) 
Number of posts                                                        
allocated to each  
 
 
category. 
 
 
(c) 
Present occupancy 
                                           
 
 
position. List of officers 
 
 
to be attached. 
 
 
(d) 
Number of vacant  
 
 
post(s) in each category. 
 
 
(e) 
Whether any roster 
                                            
 
 
is being maintained  
 
 
 
for allocation to                                              
 
 
each category? 
 
 
 
 
 
If so, copy to be  
 
 
enclosed. 
 
 
 
(f) 
How the post(s) under 
 
 
 
promotion quota fell 
                                            
 
 
vacant and since when? 
 
 
 
In case of more details separate 
papers be enclosed 
 
 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 683 
 
 
 
(g) 
Whether to be promoted   
 
 
on regular basis or for 
                                
 
 
a limited period due to 
                                
 
 
deputation/long leave etc.                                 
 
 
 
3. 
(a) 
Recruitment Rules  
 
 
 
 
framed or not. If so, 
                                
 
 
copy to be attached. 
                                
 
 
(b) 
In the absence of                                 
 
 
Recruitment Rules 
                                
 
 
whether the method of 
 
 
 
 
recruitment got 
 
 
 
 
approved by the  
                                
 
 
Establishment  
 
                                
 
 
Division. If so, copy 
                                
 
 
to be attached. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(c) 
Person(s) eligible for 
                                
 
 
promotion against                                 
 
 
vacant post(s). 
 
                                
 
(d) 
Prescribed length of 
 
 
 
 
service/experience 
 
 
 
for promotion. 
 
 
 
 
 
(e) 
Prescribed Qualification, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
if any. 
 
 
                                
 
 
(f) 
Mandatory Training/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Course, if any. 
 
                                
 
 
(g) 
Minimum required 
                                
 
 
qualification. 
 
                                
 
4. 
Seniority list(s) duly verified 
 
 
 
to be attached. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. 
Panel of eligible officer(s) duly 
 
 
 
signed by a responsible officer to 
 
 
be prepared on the prescribed 
 
 
 
form. 
 
 
 
                                
 
 
6. 
Number of PERs/ICP Charts. 
                                

Page - 684                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
7. 
Certified that the officers included in the panel are eligible in all respect and 
possess the requisite length of service required for promotion. If not, please give 
details, and reasons for submission of the case to CSB. 
 
8. 
Also certified that no disciplinary action under Government Servants (E&D) 
Rules, 1973 or proceedings on criminal charges in the court of law is pending 
against any officer included in the panel. If otherwise, indicate the names of 
officers, seniority number on the panel and brief description/nature of the case. 
 
 
 
(To be signed by the Secretary/ 
Additional Secretary Incharge 
of the Division) 
 
 
 
 
 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 685 
 
 
FOR PROMOTION TO BS-20 POSTS 
 
(AS ON……………) 
In respect of Mr. _____________  
     Personnel No.________ 
 
Domicile: …………… 
Service/Group: ……………… 
Sen. No.:.....  
Educational Qualification 
Date of Birth       Date of Superannuation 
 
 
 
SERVICE PARTICULARS 
Date of joining 
Academy 
(CSA)/SERVICE 
 
Date of promotion in 
 
Length of Service 
Eligibility for  
Consideration 
 
Present Scale 
 
Lower Ranks 
 
Total 
 
In present 
Scale 
 
 
BS-19 
 
BS-18 
 
BS-
17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Important Appointments held in the present Rank/Post: 
1. 
 
2. 
 
3. 
 
4. 
 
5. 
 
6. 
 
Extra Ordinary Leave (EOL) (if any) 
 
 
: 
…………….. 
Deputation with International Organizations (if any) 
 
: 
…………….. 
Penalties / Adverse Remarks in BS-19 (if any) 
 
: 
…………….. 
Training Courses (other than mandatory Training) 
 
: 
:…………….. 
 
Gradings of mandatory training at ……………… : …………………. 
 
Number of PERs in preceding Two Scales / 15 years 
Basic 
Scale 
Outstanding 
Very  
Good 
Good 
Average 
Below 
Average 
Cumulative 
period of PERs 
(in Months) 
Adverse 
Report/ 
Remarks 
BS-19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BS-20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Awaited Reports 
(PERs) 
 
Additional Information (if any) 
 
 
 
EFFICIENCY INDEX 
 
Required threshold 
Score of PERs+ Training Reports 
Marks awarded 
by CSB 
Total 
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendations of CSB 
 
Promoted 
Deferred 
Superseded 
 
 
 
 
    Prepared by:________________                                            Checked by:___________ 
 

Page - 686                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
FOR PROMOTION TO BS-21 POSTS 
 
(AS ON……………) 
In respect of Mr. _____________  
     Personnel No.________ 
 
Domicile: …………… 
Service/Group: ……………… 
Sen. No.:.....  
Educational Qualification 
Date of Birth       Date of Superannuation 
 
 
 
SERVICE PARTICULARS 
Date of joining 
Academy 
(CSA)/SERVICE 
 
Date of promotion in 
 
Length of Service 
Eligibility for  
Consideration 
 
Present Scale 
 
Lower Ranks 
 
Total 
 
In Present 
Scale 
 
 
BS-20 
 
BS-19 
 
BS-
18 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Important Appointments held in the present Rank/Post: 
1. 
 
2. 
 
3. 
 
4. 
 
5. 
 
6. 
 
Extra Ordinary Leave (EOL) (if any) 
 
 
: 
…………….. 
Deputation with International Organizations (if any) 
 
: 
…………….. 
Penalties / Adverse Remarks in BS-20 (if any) 
 
: 
…………….. 
Training Courses (other than mandatory Training) 
 
: 
:…………….. 
 
Gradings of mandatory training at ……………… : …………………. 
 
Number of PERs in preceding Two Scales / 15 years 
Basic 
Scale 
Outstanding 
Very  
Good 
Good 
Average 
Below 
Average 
Cumulative 
period of PERs 
(in Months) 
Adverse 
Report/ 
Remarks 
BS-19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BS-20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Awaited Reports 
(PERs) 
 
Additional Information (if any) 
 
 
 
EFFICIENCY INDEX 
 
Required threshold 
Score of PERs+ Training Reports 
Marks awarded 
by CSB 
Total 
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendations of CSB 
 
Promoted 
Deferred 
Superseded 
 
 
 
 
    Prepared by:________________                                             Checked by:___________ 
 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 687 
 
 
SENIORITY FORM 
CP-IV 
 
SENIORITY LIST 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Officer 
Domicile 
Promotee/ 
Direct 
Date 
of 
Birth 
Date of first 
appointment 
in Govt. 
service 
Date of 
regular 
appointment 
in Basic Pay 
Scale-17 
 
 
Date of 
regular 
appoint-
ment in 
present pay 
scale. 
Present 
posting 
 
 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Signature_______________________________________ 
 
    Designation _____________________________________ 
 
    Date___________________________________________ 
 
 

Page - 688                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
CP-V 
 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 689 
 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR GUIDANCE 
 
(See CP-V) 
While filling in the quantification form overleaf and working out quantification 
marks the following factors may be kept in view to avoid any error:- 
 
(i) 
The annual confidential reports carry marks as under:- 
 
Category of reports 
Overall Assessment 
Quality and output of 
work 
Integrity 
Moral 
Intellectual 
Very good 
8 
10 
10 
10 
Good 
7 
07 
07 
07 
Average 
5 
05 
05 
05 
Below Average 
1 
01 
01 
01 
 
―Outstanding Report‖ was introduced in 1985. So an ‗Outstanding Report‘ 
earned for the calendar year 1985 and that during the subsequent years would 
carry 10 marks. A ‗Very Good‘ report earned during the years proceeding the 
calendar year 1985 would, however, carry 10 marks provided (i) all except 1-2 
entries made in the report are in column A-1 or (ii) the recommendations made 
in the report are for ―accelerated promotion‖. 
(ii)   The equivalence of the ‗Overall, PER gradings for Civilian Officers serving 
in Defence Organizations vis-à-vis those in the Civil Organizations is as 
under:- 
 
 
PER gradings in the Defence Organizations 
 
PER gradings in Civil Organizations 
(a) 
Outstanding 
 
Outstanding 
(b) 
Above Average 
 
Very Good 
(c) 
High Average 
 
Good 
(d) 
Average 
 
Average 
(e) 
Low Average 
 
Below Average 
(f) 
Below Average/Unfit for promotion 
 
Poor 
 
 
(iii) DEDUCTIONS are  to be made from the total of ‗overall marks‘ as indicated 
below:- 
(a) 
One mark for each adverse report; 
(b) 
3 marks for each minor penalty imposed on a civil servant in a 
disciplinary case under (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 1973; 
(c) 
5 marks for each major penalty imposed on a civil servant in a 
disciplinary case under (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 1973. 

Page - 690                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
(iv) Addition of 2 marks is to be made for service in a [specified training] 
institution for a period of 2 years or more; 
(v) If more than one confidential reports have been initiated on an officer 
during a calendar year, their average marks would be the marks for the 
whole calendar year; 
(vi) Writing of a confidential report covering part periods of two calendar 
years is not permissible; 
(vii) If the period of a report is less than 3 months, it shall be ignored for 
purposes of quantification; 
(viii) Quantification marks should in round figure; 
(ix) If the overall grading in a CR is ambiguous e.g. placed between ‗Good‘ 
and ‗Average‘ the quantification will be based on the lower rating; 
(x) Where only two reports or less are available on an officer against posts in 
a particular basic pay  scale, these CRs will be added to the CRs earned in the 
lower post for calculating the average marks. 
(xi) Where an officer appointed to a higher post on acting charge basis is 
considered for regular promotion that post, the CR earned during acting 
charge appointment will be added to CRs earned in the lower post for 
calculating average marks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
 Subs. vide Estt. Division‘s d.o. letter No. 45/1/88-CP-3, dated 18-1-2000. 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 691 
 
 
7.11 
Guidelines for Submission of Proposals  
for Consideration of Central Selection  
Board (CSB) 
 
Reference Establishment Division‘s O.M.No.45/6/90-CP- 3, dated 3.3.1990 wherein 
guidelines/check-list for submission of proposals for consideration of *CSB were intimated to 
the Ministries/Divisions. Under the said guidelines, the proposals signed by the 
Secretary/Additional Secretary Incharge and accompanied by prescribed documents duly 
authenticated/stamped by responsible officer, are required to be forwarded to the 
Establishment Division for submission to the *CSB. 
 
2. 
It has been observed in some cases, however, that the proposals for the 
Central Selection Boards do not fully conform to the laid down requirements on the subject. 
In some cases, the proposals are not duly signed by the concerned Secretary/ Additional 
Secretary Incharge while, in others, the accompanying documents are either unattested 
and/or carrying incorrect/ incomplete information. All this leads to avoidable delays on 
account of back references to the concerned Ministries/Divisions. 
 
3. 
It has also been observed in many cases that the documents are forwarded at 
the Section Officer‘s level and addressed to his counterpart in this Division. Since the Joint 
Secretary (Admn) of the Ministry/Division concerned is the focal point there, such proposals 
for *CSB must invariably be forwarded under his covering letter after ensuring that all the 
requisite documents relevant to this exercise have been prepared and duly signed by the 
concerned officers. Moreover, with a view to enforcing secrecy as well as prompt attention, 
all such references should, henceforth, be addressed to the Additional Secretary (CP&R), 
Establishment Division, and delivered under a sealed cover. Replies to any query on the part 
of the Establishment Division (which would not be below the level of Deputy Secretary) 
should also be furnished at least at the same level if not at the level of Joint Secretary 
(Admn). 
 
4. 
All Ministries/Divisions are requested to kindly ensure that their promotion 
proposals for the consideration of *CSB are forwarded in the light of the 
position/requirements of paras 2 & 3 above. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M. No.45/6/90-CP-3, dated 3-5-1995]. 
 
7.12 
Procedure for Referring Cases  
to the Selection Board 
 
It has been observed that proposals relating to the Central Selection Board are not 
being sent alongwith the required number of copies each of the essential documents, like the 
―proposal proforma‖  properly filled in, complete C.R. dossiers of the officers, their 
particulars of service, bio-data, latest seniority lists (arranged according to the new gradation 
system) etc. Moreover, government servants having (former). East Pakistan domicile and the 
repatriated PSOWs need to be cleared first by the D.I.B. It is also observed that the 
particulars of service of the government servants are generally not prepared carefully and the 
C.R. dossiers are not checked to find out the precise reasons for the missing reports.  This has 
                                                          
 Note:-  
    As CSB-I & CSB-II are no more in practice.  
 Career Planning  & Regulations. 

Page - 692                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
to be ensured in all cases and the latest reports have to be invariably attached to the proposals 
or the reasons for not attaching such reports have to be clearly indicated. 
 
2. 
At times, big bundles of C.R. dossiers are sent to the residence of the 
Secretary, Central Selection Board. This involves great risk (apart from inconvenience) as 
bulky bundles, of C.R. dossiers have to be carried from residence to the office.  Moreover, 
the CR dossiers received just before the meeting cannot be properly checked.  In view of 
this, it is imperative that the C.R. dossiers should be sent to the Establishment Division well 
in advance of the date of the meeting of the Central Selection Board after due scrutiny 
insuring that these are complete in all respects. However, if under extraordinary 
circumstances the CR dossiers have to be sent just before the meeting, the 
Ministries/Divisions may kindly arrange to deliver these CR dossiers through special 
messengers in the office of the Secretary, Central Selection Board before the meeting of the 
Board in which other items are to be discussed. 
 
3. 
The above mentioned requirements should be invariably kept in view while 
sending proposals for the consideration of the Central Selection Board. 
[Authority:– Estt. Div.‘s D.O. Letter No.25/7/74-AV, dated 3-10-1974]. 
7.13 
Consideration of Cases by Central Selection  
Board – Furnishing of Full Particulars of  
Candidates for Promotion 
 
It has come to the notice of the Central Selection Board that in certain cases a 
particular candidate or candidates is/are recommended out of the total number of candidates 
considered by the Ministry/Division, without mentioning the full particulars of all the 
candidates.  The proper procedure in such cases is to place the full particulars of ALL the 
candidates before the Central Selection Board so that the Board may decide which of the 
candidates are not suitable for the post in question. It is accordingly requested that the full 
particulars of ALL the candidates in the field of selection or those who may have been 
considered by the administrative Ministries/Divisions, should be placed before the Central 
Selection Board in all such cases. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M. No.24/3/75-AV, dated 12-2-1975]. 
7.14 
Re-appointment to Posts Within the 
Purview of Selection Board 
  
It has been decided that if the re-appointment of an officer to a post took place after 
more than one year of the reversion from that post the case should be placed before the 
Central Selection Board for determining the continued fitness of the officer to hold the post.  
After approval of the Central Selection Board, it would not be necessary to refer the case to 
the Prime Minister/President again. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.3/20/70-D.III, dated 16-9-1971]. 
7.15 
Short-Term Appointments and Direct Appointments 
to Higher Secretariat Posts-under the Present Orders 
 
Short-term appointments and direct appointments to higher Secretariat posts-under 
the present orders are as under:— 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 693 
 
 
(i) 
it is not necessary to refer to the Selection Board acting appointments made 
as a purely temporary arrangement for a period not expected to exceed 4 
months; and 
(ii) 
the Board is not concerned with appointments made from sources other than 
from government service. 
 
2. 
It has been decided that:- 
(a) the period upto which appointment may be made without consulting 
the Selection Board should be reduced from 4 months to one month; 
and 
 
(2) 
The Selection Board should deal with appointments to higher posts in the 
Secretariat even in the rare cases when such appointments are made from persons not in 
Government service, i.e. all appointments which are within the purview of the Selection 
Board will be made on the recommendations of the Board irrespective of the fact whether or 
not they are made from among persons already in Government service. 
 [Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M. No.33/7/49-SEI, dated 13-8-1951]. 
7.16 
Convention Regarding Acceptance of  
Recommendations of the Selection Board 
 
The Administrative Enquiry Committee reviewed the working of the Selection 
Board and in their report made the following recommendations:- 
(a) 
that both for protection to Ministers and in the interests of efficient working, 
the rules about the Selection Board be closely adhered to; and 
(b) 
that there should be a convention whereby the advice of the Selection Board 
should be accepted quickly and automatically except in wholly exceptional 
cases. 
 
2. 
Government considered these recommendations and their orders are as 
follows:— 
 
(a) 
Accepted. 
(b) 
Government have decided that there should be a convention whereby the 
advice of the Selection Board should be accepted quickly save in exceptional 
cases; and that if the Prime Minister or the Minister concerned disagrees with 
the view of the Selection Board, the case should be returned to the Board for 
further consideration, and a decision taken by the Prime Minister only after 
the further views of the Board have been placed before him. 
[The above instructions are neither a law nor a rule and are subservient in the provisions of 
the Civil Servants Act, 1973 specially with reference to powers of the ―competent authority‖ 
                                                          
Note.- See rule 8B(4) of Civil Servants (A,P&T) Rules 1973, in the present  context. 
 The contents of the O.M No. 33/3/54-SEI, dated 22-09-1954 have been upheld by the Lahore High Court, 
Lahore in Writ Petition No. 7735 of 2005 titled Major Fateh Sher Vs Govt. of Pakistan and others (Supreme 
Court: Civil Appeal No. 1017 of 2005). Ref. Estt. Div.‘s O.M No. 3/23/2007-R-2, dated 22nd June, 2007. 
 Clarification vide OM No. 3/2/2005-CP.6, dated 21-9-2005. 

Page - 694                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
for giving final approval regarding appointment by promotion. These powers are unfettered 
and the competent authority may accept, reject or refer back the matter to the Central 
Selection Board for reconsideration. All these options are available to the Competent 
Authority whose powers are unfettered to choose any one of the options]. 
 
3. 
In dealing with Selection Board cases, these orders of government must be 
strictly followed. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.33/3/54-SEI, dated 22-9-1954]. 
 
7.17 
Meetings of the Central Selection Board 
 
Reference Cabinet Secretary‘s d.o. letter No. 25/1/72-AV, dated the 27th  
November, 1972 in which it was stated that only Secretaries should represent their 
Ministries/Divisions at the meetings of the Central Selection Board. If a Ministry/ Division is 
not headed by a Secretary or the Secretary is away on foreign tour, then the most senior 
officer (Additional Secretary/Joint Secretary) in that Ministry/Division could represent the 
administrative Ministry. The instructions contained in the Cabinet Secretary d.o. letter dated 
27-11-1972, were reiterated in d.o. letter No. 25-1/72-AV, dated the 17th January, 1974 and it 
was further stated that a Secretary/ Additional Secretary was not at all in a position to attend 
the meeting of the Board, the specific clearance of the Establishment Secretary may please 
be obtained before deputing some other officer to attend the meeting of the Board. In order to 
make it convenient for the administrative secretaries to so arrange their engagements as to 
find time for attending meetings of the Central Selection Board, it was decided to hold 
meetings of the Board on alternate Thursdays. 
 
2. 
It has, however, been noticed that even now the Secretaries/ Additional 
Secretaries Incharge of Ministries/Divisions frequently do not attend the meetings of the 
Board. In future, if the Secretaries/Additional Secretaries incharge of the Ministries/ 
Divisions concerned do not attend the meetings of the Board, the proposals would be 
returned to those Ministries/ Divisions unconsidered. 
[Authority:– Addl. Secretary(Estt) d.o. letter No.25/4/76-AV, dated 8-10-1976]. 
 
8.1 
Promotion/Direct Recruitment Quota 
 
A question has arisen as to how the quota for promotion and direct recruitment if 
prescribed in the ratio of 50:50 in the recruitment rules is to be maintained when the number 
of available posts is odd and not equally divisible. The matter has been considered in 
consultation with the FPSC and it has been decided that in such cases weightage may be 
given to promotion quota. For example, where an odd number of posts, say 9, are to be filled 
in the ratio of 50:50, five posts should be earmarked for promotion and four for direct 
recruitment. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. D. 210/84.R.5, dated 3-6-1986]. 
 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 695 
 
 
8.2 
Filling-up of Vacancies – Distribution According to  
Quota for Promotion, Transfer and Direct Recruitment 
 
A question has arisen as to how the vacancies caused by resignation, transfer, etc. 
of the persons appointed against the quota of departmental candidates or direct recruits, 
before confirmation of such persons should be filled. The matter has been considered in 
consultation with the Federal Public Service Commission and it has been decided that the 
vacancies in various services/posts caused by any reason, should be filled on the basis of the 
quotas fixed for promotion, transfer and direct recruitment.  For this purpose the total 
number of posts in a cadre should be distributed in accordance with the fixed quotas and the 
vacancies in such posts should be filled so as to achieve the overall quotas fixed for 
departmental candidates and direct recruits etc. 
 
2. 
Suitable amendments should be made in the recruitment rules where 
necessary, in consultation with the Establishment Division and the Federal Public Service 
Commission. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 5(1)11/67-D.V., dated 21-3-1968]. 
 
8.3 
Maintenance of Roster for Application of 
Promotion/Initial Appointment Quota 
 
In continuation of Establishment Division‘s O.M. of even number dated 30th 
September,2015 on the subject cited above; in order to avoid diversity in maintaining of 
roster for a post to be filled through (a) Promotion (b) initial appointment, or / (c) transfer in 
accordance with the Recruitment Rules; it has been desired that roster should be maintained, 
under the signature of Joint Secretary (Admn.) or equivalent, in a single way i.e. by 
sharing/distribution of sanctioned strength of a post, in whole numbers, to promotion quota 
and transfer quota or/direct appointment quota, according to the following format:- 
Roster 
 
As on 00.00.0000(date) 
 
For the post of ---------------------- BS------under notified Recruitment Rules vide SRO------------- 
 
A. 
Total Sanction Strength: 
 
 
00 
B. 
Quota/Share for Promotion:  
 
 
00%= 
00 Posts 
C. 
Quota/Share for Transfer: 
 
 
00%= 
00 Posts 
D. 
Quota/Share for Direct Appointment  
 
00%= 
00 Posts   
 
 
Sl.No. 
(must be equal to 
sanctioned strength 
‗A‘ above) 
Post allocated 
(to promotion/transfer/ 
Direct appointment 
Quota) 
Name of 
officers 
Present status of 
the post 
(filled/vacant) 
Remarks: 
e.g. how the 
post become 
vacant/filled 
 
 
Note:— In case of any change in the sanctioned strength of the post/or share in the promotion 
transfer/direct appointment quota for recruitment in the relevant Recruitment Rules, the above roster 
will be revised.  

Page - 696                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
 
2. 
It is further clarified that a circle of roster may be started/completed by filling 
the vacancies in the first instance through promotion then by transfer/or direct appointment 
(as per the requirement of the rules framed for the post), before another circle for 
promotion(s) be started. Besides, if any violation has been made in maintaining roster it must 
be rectified in the first instance, accordingly.  
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.21/1/90-R-5 dated 12-11-2015]. 
 
8.4 
Eligibility of Superintendent (BS-17) to  
Participate in Section Officers Promotional 
Examination 
 
Refer to the subject cited above and to say that a query has received in 
Establishment Division about eligibility of Superintendent (BS-17) for Section Officers 
Promotional Examination (SOPE). It is clarified that grant of BS-17 to Superintendent is not 
a promotion within the meaning of Section-9 of the Civil Servant Act,1973, therefore, for all 
practical purposes, the Superintendent granted/placed in BS-17 are the substantive holders of 
the post in BS-16 and are eligible for taking SOPE subject to completion of all other 
conditions/codal formalities.  
[Authority:— Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 7/5/2014-T-V dated 29-12-2016]. 
 
9.1 
Proforma Promotions 
 
The Ministries and Divisions as well as Attached Departments and Subordinate 
Offices, have, in the past, been ordering proforma promotions (also called promotions in 
absentia) of persons serving on deputation on foreign service, or in ex-cadre posts as a matter 
of course on the sole ground that the deputationist had been approved for promotions by the 
D.P.C. of the parent department and a person junior to him had been promoted.  This has 
resulted in the deputationists serving away from their parent department or cadre for unduly 
long periods as such persons not only enjoy better emoluments while on deputation but also 
feel secure that their interests are being fully protected in their own department. 
 
2.  
The intention underlying ‗proforma promotions‘ is to protect the interests of 
the government servant only in circumstances where the government servant is required to 
serve away from his parent cadre because of a definite requirement of public interest and not 
merely to suit his own interest.  Normally, therefore, a deputationist, as soon as he becomes 
due for promotion should be required to revert to his parent department or cadre so that he is 
promoted to the next higher post for which he may have been declared fit.  In case an offer of 
promotion is made to him and he declines to revert, he may be allowed to remain in the 
outside post on the clear understanding that he will not ask for ‗proforma promotion‘.  Only 
in exceptional cases where the borrowing department or organization expresses its inability 
to spare the officer, and the head of the parent department records in writing why he 
considers it necessary to keep the government servant on deputation in the ex-cadre 
appointment, may proforma promotions be made.  Even in such cases, the period for which 
the officer is allowed to continue to remain on deputation, with the benefit of proforma 
promotion, should be judiciously fixed so that the officer reverts to his cadre and is appointed 
to the post for which he has been approved for promotion, as early as possible.  Such period 
should not normally exceed 6 months.  All cases where ‗proforma promotions‘ are allowed 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 697 
 
 
for a period exceeding 6 months should be reported to the Establishment Division with full 
justification. 
 
3.  
The Ministries/Divisions are also advised that in future whenever they send 
an officer or member of the staff on deputation to an ex-cadre post, or on foreign service, 
they should settle in advance the period of deputation with the borrowing office/organization 
on the expiry of which the government servant should revert to his parent cadre.  While 
selecting persons for deputation, care should also be taken not to depute officers who would 
soon be coming up or promotion to the next rank in their own cadre and may have to be 
re-called. In the majority of cases, officers and staff are sent on deputation on their 
application or request.  They should be warned that in case they fall due for promotion, they 
will have to revert to their parent cadre and they will not be allowed promotions in absentia. 
 
4.  
The above instructions do not apply to senior appointments in international 
organizations such as the United Nations, the R.C.D. Sectt., etc. to which officers are 
nominated by government having regard to their qualifications, experience and suitability.  
In such cases, it may be presumed that the services of the officer have been placed on 
deputation with the foreign organization in the public interest, and ‗proforma promotion‘ 
when called for, may be made. 
[Authority:– Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No. 1/28/71-D.II, dated 29-7-1971]. 
 
9.2 
Consideration for Promotion  
of a Person on Transfer to  
Another Office 
 
A permanent ministerial government servant, who is temporarily transferred 
from one office to another in the public interest, should be considered for promotion to a 
higher BPS in his parent office as and when a vacancy occurs in the higher BPS and if he 
is selected for promotion in accordance with the relevant rules, he should be appointed 
proforma to the higher BPS so that when he reverts to his parent office he can count, for 
seniority and increments in the higher BPS, the period for which he remained on 
deputation.  No monetary benefit in respect of his proforma promotion in the parent 
office shall be allowed to him while he is on deputation.  Proforma promotion in such 
cases should be made with effect from a date determined in accordance with the ‗next 
below rule and not from any earlier date. 
[Authority:– Finance Division‘s O.M. No. F.1.(5)-RI-(R.W.P.)/62, dated 21-4-1962]. 
 
9.3 
Proforma Promotions –  
Review of Cases 
 
The question has been raised whether the instructions issued in the 
Establishment Division Office Memorandum No. 1/28/71-D. II, dated 29th  July, 1971 
regarding proforma promotion apply also to past cases where proforma promotions had 
already been made prior to the issue of these instructions. The Ministries and Divisions 
                                                          
 Or the successor organization i.e. E.C.O. 

Page - 698                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
are advised to review all such cases.  If the officer had been allowed to proceed on 
deputation for a specific period, he should be requested to revert to the parent department 
on expiry of that period. In case no period was specified, the parent department should 
examine the propriety of re-calling the officer to the parent cadre as it is not 
administratively desirable that officers and staff should remain away from their parent 
cadre for unduly long period, say more than 3 years in the case of gazetted officers and 5 
years in the case of non-gazetted staff. However, if in the case of a particular department 
the number involved is large, the recall of the deputationist should be judiciously 
staggered so that no large scale reversions are caused in the parent office consequent on 
the re-call of the deputationists. Priority in re-call should be given to those who have been 
allowed proforma promotion in the parent cadre. Where, however, the borrowing 
departments are prepared to confirm such officers and staff on their own establishment 
(provided this is admissible in accordance with the recruitment rules applicable to the post) 
and the officer or staff is also willing to be so absorbed, reversion to parent cadre may not be 
insisted upon. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.1(28)/71-D.II, dated 28-3-1972]. 
 
9.4 
Reversion of Deputationists to Parent Departments 
 
Cases have come to the notice of the Establishment Division where officers 
whose services were obtained on deputation for a specific period were not returned by the 
borrowing department when the parent department asked for their reversion.  Attention in 
this regard is invited to the Establishment Division‘s O.M.No.1(28)/ 71-D.II, dated the 
28th March, 1972, wherein it was laid down that officers obtained on deputation should be 
reverted to their parent department on the expiry of the period of deputation.  It was 
further laid down therein that the period of deputation should normally be 3 years in the 
case of officers in BPS 16 and above 5 years in the case of staff in BPS 15 and below. 
 
2. 
In the interest of efficient administration, it is reiterated that the above 
mentioned instructions should be followed rigidly and the deputationists reverted to their 
parent department on the expiry of the period of deputation unless the intention is to 
permanently absorb the deputationist in the cadre or department where he is serving on 
deputation and the recruitment rules for the post provide for such a course.  In such cases, 
the consent of the deputationist to the suspension or termination of lien on his permanent 
post in the parent department, as well as the agreement of the parent department, should 
be obtained. With the completion of these formalities the deputationist will be treated as 
regular member of the establishment of the borrowing department. 
 
3. 
Where, however, it is not intended to permanently absorb the deputationist 
in the borrowing department the deputationist must not be allowed to remain away from 
his parent cadre for unduly protected period; he should be reverted to the parent 
department on expiry of the period of deputation as originally fixed.  If the borrowing 
department needs the services of another officer having the qualifications or experience 
possessed by the deputationist, a request should be made to the lending department to 
depute some other officer in his place possessing the same qualifications or experience as 
far as possible.  The borrowing department in no case should insist on retaining a 
particular individual beyond the original period of deputation. 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 699 
 
 
 
4. 
All Ministries, Divisions and Departments are requested to examine the 
cases of deputationists with them and take necessary action in the light of the above 
instructions.  If relaxation of these orders is required in any individual case, it may be 
referred to Establishment Division with full justification. 
[Authority:– Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.1(28)/75-D.II, dated 6-3-1975]. 
9.5  
Revised Guidelines for the FR-17(I) Committee/High 
Level Committee to Consider the Cases of Proforma  
Promotion on the Basis of Antedated Seniority 
Part-I  Rule Provisions 
 
The F.R.17(I) reads as under:- 
F.R.17(I) subject to any exceptions specifically made in these rules and to the 
provisions of sub-rule (2), an officer shall begin to draw the pay and 
allowances attached to his tenure of a post with effect from the date when he 
assumes the duties of that post and shall cease to draw them as soon as he 
ceases to discharge those duties. 
[Provided that the appointing authority, may if satisfied that a civil servant 
who was entitled to be promoted from a particular date was, for no fault of 
his own, wrongfully prevented from rendering service to the Federation in 
the higher post, direct that such civil servant shall be paid the arrears of pay 
and allowances of such higher post through proforma promotion or up-
gradation arising from the antedated fixation of his seniority]. 
Part-II  Relevant Committee/TORs 
 
2. 
A Committee was constituted vide Finance Division‘s (Regulation Wing) 
O.M.No.F.3(I)R-2/94 dated 28-05-2001 to examine the claims under proviso to FR-17 and 
to advise the Appointing Authority (s) in decision making. The revised composition of the 
Junior Level Committee on FR-17(1) is as follows:— 
 
Joint Secretary (Regs), 
 
 
 
 
Finance Division   
 
 
 
Chairman 
 
 
Joint Secretary (Regs), 
 
 
 
 
 
Establishment Division 
 
 
 
Member 
 
 
A  BS-20 officer  of Law, Justice 
 
and Human Rights Division to be 
 
 
 
 
nominated by the Law Secretary.  
 
 
Member 
 
 

Page - 700                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
 
Joint Secretary of the Ministry/Division 
 
 
concerned. [also for the organizations 
 
under the administrative control].  
 
 
Co-opted Member 
 
 
Deputy Secretary (Regulations) 
 
 
 
Finance Division  
 
 
 
Secretary 
 
 
3. 
A High Level Committee was also constituted vide Finance Division 
(Regulation 
Wing) 
O.M. 
No.3(1)R-2/94-1029-(Pt) 
dated 
10-12-2010 
to 
above 
recommendations for cases in the respect of Civil Servants in BS-20 and above under proviso 
to FR-17(I). The revised composition of the High Level FR-17(I) Committee is as under:- 
 
Secretary, Finance Division 
 
 
Chairman 
 
Secretary, Establishment Division 
 
 
Member 
 
Secretary, Cabinet Division  
 
 
Member 
 
Secretary, Law, Justice & Human 
 
 
 
Rights Division 
  
 
 
 
Member 
 
Additional Secretary-I, 
 
Establishment Division 
 
 
 
Member 
 
Secretary of the Ministry/Division 
 
 
 
Concerned.  
 
 
 
 
Co-opted Member 
 
Additional Secretary (Regulations),  
 
 
Finance Division   
 
 
 
Member/Secretary 
 
4. 
The mandate of the Committee is as under:— 
(b) 
The Junior Level Committee on FR-17(1) headed by Joint Secretary 
(Regs.) Finance Division shall also make initial scrutiny in cases of 
civil employees in BPS-20 and above and submit its report to the 
above High Level Committee for firming up of its recommendations. 
(i) 
The recommendations of High Level Committee shall be 
submitted to the appointing authority i.e. Prime Minister for 
approval. 
(ii) 
The Junior Level Committee on FR-17(1) headed by Joint 
Secretary (Regs.) Finance Division shall continue to consider/ 
recommend cases in respect of civil servants in BPS-19 and 
below. 
Part-III Types of cases not to be considered by the  
FR-17(I) committee(s) 
 
5. 
The Committee(s) shall refer the following types of cases to the respective 
DPC/Selection Board for consultation before consideration by the Committee:— 
(a) 
A Civil Servant who has not yet been recommended for promotion to higher 
post by respective Selection Board/ Committee except the cases of retired 
civil servants who could not be considered for promotion for no fault of their 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 701 
 
 
own and retired on attaining the age of superannuation. 
(b) 
A Civil Servant requesting for proforma promotion in Service Cadre to 
which he/she does not belong. 
(c) 
A Civil Servant who had been superseded on the recommendation of 
respective DPC/Selection Board and approved by Competent Authority and 
the said supersession is still intact. 
(d) 
A Civil Servant requesting for proforma promotion on the ex-cadre posts 
he/she was not nominated for mandatory training but his/her authority was 
nominated at the relevant point of time and such nominations for training 
pertains to period beyond one year. 
(e) 
The Civil Servants who were superseded on the recommendations of 
respective Selection Board/Committee for the recorded reasons having been 
approved by the Competent Authority.    
 
Part-IV Types of Cases to be Considered by the  
FR-17(I) Committee(s) 
 
6. 
The respective Committee shall consider the cases of Civil Servants for 
proforma promotion to the next higher post in their own cadre or service/group who have 
been granted antedated seniority within the meaning of proviso below FR-17:— 
(a) 
A Civil Servant who was deferred for any of the reason indicated in the 
promotion policy but subsequently it is found that the said reason was 
wrongfully mention. For instance Mr. ‗A‘ was deferred for the reasons that 
he had not undergone the prescribed training or passed departmental 
examination. Subsequently it came to notice that he had undergone the 
mandatory training or passed the departmental examination but the training 
evaluation report or result of examination could not be submitted to the 
respective Selection Board/Committee at the relevant point of time.  
 
(a)  
(i) 
Cases of retired civil servants who could not be considered for 
promotion for no fault of their own and retired on attaining the age of 
superannuation.  
(b) 
A Civil Servant who was not superseded previously on the recommendations 
of the respective DPC/Selection Board duly approved by Competent 
Authority but his/her claim has arisen for any other reason.  
(c) 
A Civil Servant recommended by respective Selection Board/ Committee for 
supersession and the recommendations were approved by Competent 
Authority provided that the said supersession has been converted into 
deferment for reasons, what so ever, either by Count of Law or Competent 
Authority. 
(d) 
A Civil Servant who was not recommended initially for promotion to higher 
post by the respective DPC/Selection Board as his/her score was below the 
minimum threshold for various reasons including.  
(i) 
non-inclusion of additional marks for serving in training institutions.  
(ii) 
non-inclusion of marks for any PER in the PER score. 
(iii) non-inclusion of marks of the Selection Board. 

Page - 702                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
(iv) wrong deletion of marks on account of penalty/adverse remarks etc. 
(v) 
any other reason deemed by the Committee to be a reason for wrongful 
prevention to hold higher post.  
 
(e) 
The cases at (d) above to be considered if the respective DPC/Selection 
Board subsequently took note of said omission(s) and had recommended 
such Civil Servant for promotion to higher post.  
    
 (f) 
The FR-17 Committees shall not consider the cases beyond the scope of  
FR-17. 
[Authority:—Finance Division‘s O.M.No.4(6)Imp/FR-17/2013-277 dated 18-09-2015]. 
 
9.6 
Promotion on Temporary/Regular Basis 
 
At times, Establishment Division receives proposals for regularising the promotion 
of those promoted earlier against deputation, leave, etc. vacancies, on the grounds that 
regular vacancy has since occurred. 
 
2.  
The matter has been considered in the Establishment Division in light of the 
provisions of the Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973, read 
with the Promotion Policy covering promotion upto BPS 21. It is clarified that an officer 
recommended 
for 
promotion 
on 
temporary 
basis 
by 
the 
Central 
Selection 
Board/Departmental Promotion Committee and approved by the competent authority is 
liable to reversion to lower post in case the higher post is subsequently either abolished or 
ceases to exist or its original incumbent joins back. However, if a temporarily promoted 
officer continues working against the higher post without any break and, in the 
meanwhile, a regular vacancy in the cadre becomes available, no fresh clearance of the 
Central Selection Board/DPC and approval of the competent authority is required for his 
promotion to higher post on regular basis. The officer will, therefore, be deemed to have 
been promoted on regular basis with effect from the date of occurrence of the vacancy on 
regular basis in the cadre, subject to the following conditions:- 
(a) 
No disciplinary/criminal proceedings have been initiated against him/her 
during the period from the date of temporary promotion till the occurrence of 
vacancy on regular basis. 
(b) 
His/her up-to-date service record would form the basis for assessing fitness 
for promotion on regular basis i.e. quantified score should not be less than 
minimum threshold prescribed for the purpose. 
[Authority:– Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.30/2/90-CP-3, dated 18-2-1997]. 
CLARIFICATION 
 
Refer to Establishment Division‘s O.M. No.30/2/90-CP-3 dated 18-02-1997 
which inter alia provided for regularizing the promotion of officers who were earlier 
promoted against deputation, leave etc vacancies on the ground that regular vacancy has 
occurred subject to satisfaction of the conditions prescribed under the above referred O.M. A 
number of references are received in the Establishment Division regarding clarification for 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 703 
 
 
extending the applicability of this O.M. to the cases of initial appointments made against 
temporary vacancies. 
 
2. 
The matter was considered in the Establishment Division and it has been 
decided to extend the applicability of instructions contained in the above referred O.M. dated 
18-02-1997 to cases of initial appointment as well subject to the following conditions:— 
(i) 
The initial appointment against the temporary vacancy is made in the manner 
prescribed for appointment against regular vacancy duly observing 
regional/provincial quota and qualification & experience prescribed in the 
Recruitment Rules of the post concerned.  
(ii) 
The incumbent has continuously worked on the temporary vacancy during 
the period from appointment to the occurrence of the regular vacancy. 
(iii) No disciplinary/criminal proceedings have been initiated against him/her 
during the said period.  
(iv) His/her up-to-date service record would form the basis for assessing fitness 
for the continuation of subject appointment. 
[Authority:- Establishment Division‘s O.M No.30/2/90-CP-3/R-2 dated 14-04-2014]. 
 
9.7 
Promotion of an Officer/ 
Official During LPR 
 
A question has arisen whether an officer/official who is on LPR can be 
considered for promotion against a higher post or otherwise. 
 
2.  
The matter has been considered and the view held is that LPR is one of the 
types of leave to which a government servant is entitled. As he continues to be a 
government servant and can be called even for duty, he can, therefore, be considered for 
promotion against a higher post during LPR. 
 
3.  
All Ministries/Divisions are requested to bring these instructions to the notice 
of all concerned. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.10/62/98-R.2, dated 26-6-1998]. 
 
9.8 
Bar against Promotion of Ad-Hoc Appointees 
 
The following further instructions are issued for regulating ad-hoc appointments:— 
 
(i) 
Persons appointed on ad-hoc basis should possess the required 
qualifications and experience prescribed for posts. 
 
(ii) 
Persons appointed on an ad-hoc basis should not be promoted to higher 
posts. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.3/29/70-D.III, dated 7-1-1971]. 
 
 
 

Page - 704                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
III. TRAINING  
A. National School of Public Policy Rules  
Sl.No.10 
National School of Public Policy Rules,2017 
 
S.R.O. 126(I)/2017.— In exercise of the powers conferred by section 16A of the 
National School of Public Policy‘ Ordinance, 2002 (XCIX of 2002), the Federal 
Government is pleased to make the following rules, namely:— 
 
1. 
Short title and commencement.—(l) These rules may be called the 
National School of Public Policy Rules, 2017. 
 
(2) 
They shall come into force at once. 
 
2. 
Definitions.—(1) In these rules, unless there is anything repugnant in the 
subject or context.— 
(a) 
―Chairman‖ means the Chairman of the Board; 
(b) 
―employee‖ means a person appointed in the School on regular basis, but 
does not include the persons posted on deputation or appointed on contract 
basis or on work charge basis; 
(c) 
―Government‖ means the Federal Government; 
(d) 
―Ordinance‖ means the National School of Public Policy Ordinance, 2002 
(XCIX of 2002); 
(e) 
―regulations‖ means the regulations made under the Ordinance; and 
(f) 
―rules‖ Means the National School of Public Policy Rules, 2017. 
(g) 
―Schedule‖ means the schedule to these rules. 
 
(2) 
All other words and expressions used but not defined herein shall have the 
same meaning as are assigned to them in the Ordinance. 
 
3. 
Business of the Board.—(1) The Board may meet as and when required 
but it shall meet at least twice in a year.  
 
(2) 
Half of the total membership of the Board shall constitute the quorum for 
a meeting of the Board.  
 
(3) 
The decisions of the Board shall be taken by majority of its members 
present and, in case of a tie, the Chairman shall have a casting vote.  
 
(4) 
All orders and decisions of the Board shall be reduced in writing. 
 
4. 
Removal of a member other than an ex-officio member of the 
Board.—(1) The Prime Minister, either on the basis of his own information or on 
receiving a complaint, for removal of a member other than an ex-officio member, may 
direct the matter to be enquired into by any BS-22 officer. 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 705 
 
 
 
(2) 
In case of physical or mental disability of a member, other than an ex-
officio member, he shall be examined by a medical board constituted by the concerned 
Division on request of Establishment Division. The medical board shall after examination 
make recommendations for retention or otherwise of the member.  
 
(3) 
The Prime Minister may decide, in light of the recommendations of the 
inquiry held under sub-rule (1) or report of the medical board under sub-rule (2), to 
remove from office the member. 
 
5. 
Resignation.— (1) A member other than an ex-officio member or Rector, 
may resign his office by writing under his hand addressed to the Prime Minister.  
 
(2) 
The resignation shall not become effective unless it is accepted by the 
Prime Minister and the member or, as the case may be, the Rector shall not absent 
himself till acceptance of resignation.  
 
6. 
Rector.—(1) The Rector of the School shall be appointed on contract 
basis for a non-extendable term of four years subject to provisions of the Ordinance and 
terms and conditions and eligibility criteria as laid down in the Schedule.  
 
(2) 
The Rector shall be the principal academic and administrative officer of 
the School and shall be responsible for proper implementation of the decisions of the 
Board and for the execution of the programmes of the School in accordance with the 
Ordinance and rules and regulations made thereunder. 
 
 (3) The Board shall finalize a panel of at least three candidates for 
appointment as Rector, subject to provisions of the Ordinance and the rules and 
regulations made thereunder.  
 
(4) 
At any time when office of the Rector is vacant, or the Rector is unable to 
perform his functions for one reason or the other, the charge of vacant post shall be 
.entrusted to any suitable officer with the approval of appointing authority.  
 
(5) 
Subject to the provisions of the Ordinance and rules and regulations made 
thereunder, the Rector shall exercise and perform such other powers and functions as may 
be determined by the Board.  
 
7. 
Removal of Rector.—(1) The Prime Minister, either on the basis of his 
own information or on receiving a complaint for removal of the Rector, may desire the 
matter to be enquired into by any BS-22 officer.  
 
(2) 
In case of physical, or mental disability, the Rector shall be examined by a 
medical board constituted by the concerned Division on the request of Establishment 
Division. The medical board after due examination shall make appropriate recommenda-
tions for retention or otherwise of the Rector. 

Page - 706                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
 
(3) 
The Prime Minister may decide, in light of the recommendations of the 
inquiry held under sub-rule (1) or report of the medical board under sub-rule (2), to 
remove from office the Rector. 
 
8. 
Directing staff.—(1) The directing staff of the School shall be posted by 
the competent authority through the selection committee constituted under rule 9, from 
amongst the regularly appointed officers belonging to the federally constituted 
occupational groups or services against fifty percent of the posts in management pay 
scales as specified in the Schedule.  
 
(2) 
The remaining fifty percent posts shall be filled through initial 
appointment in management pay scales through the selection committee constituted under 
rule 9, from amongst the persons from private sector or academia as specified in the Schedule 
duly observing regional and provincial and other quotas prescribed by the Government.  
 
(3) 
The Rector shall designate one of the directing staff as the Chief Instructor. 
 
(4) 
The directing staff shall perform such functions and duties as may be 
assigned to them by the Chief Instructor. 
 
(5) 
On coming of these Rules into force, all existing incumbent Directing 
Staff shall have to go through the selection process under Rule 9, and •shall continue to 
perform functions under existing terms and conditions till their selection under these rules. 
 
(6) 
Service as directing staff shall be counted towards regular service to the 
extent of officers selected from regularly appointed officers belonging to the federally 
constituted occupational groups or services. 
 
(7) 
The pension contribution of the officers of federally constituted 
occupational groups and services posted in the School under sub-rule (1) shall be made 
by the School.  
 
9. 
Selection committee.—The following shall be selection committee to 
make recommendations, for appointment or posting of the directing staff, to the Prime 
Minister through the Establishment Division.— 
 
(a) 
Secretary, Cabinet Division  
Chairman  
 
(b) 
Secretary, Establishment Division  
Member  
 
(c) 
Secretary Finance 
Member  
 
(d) 
Two members of the Board nominated by  
Member/s  
 
 
the Prime Minister  
 
(e) 
Rector 
 
 
 
 
        Member/Secretary 
 
10. 
Repeal.—The National School of Public Policy Service Regulations, 
2014 are hereby repealed to the extent of these rules but the repeal thereof shall not affect 
any action or anything done or suffered thereunder. 
 
 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 707 
 
 
Schedule 
[Rule 8 (1),(9) & 9(2)] 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name 
Post 
Pay Scale 
Qualification & 
Experience 
Method of 
Appointment 
Appointing 
Authority 
Age Limit 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
1. 
Rector 
Rs. one million per 
month plus a staff 
car with driver and 
medical 
facilities 
under MP-I scale 
(a) 
The 
candidate 
should be a serving or 
retired civil servant in 
BS-22 or equivalent.  
(b) The tenure of the 
post shall be a non-
extendable term of four 
years or till attaining 
the age of sixty-five 
years, 
whichever 
is 
earlier. 
Initial 
appoint-
ment 
or 
the 
appointment of 
serving 
BS-22 
officer 
Prime 
Minister 
 
 
 
65 
2. 
Directing 
Staff for 
NMC 
MP-I 
Initial appointment 
(a) Ph.D or M. Phil 
Degree 
in 
Public 
Policy, 
Economics, 
Finance, 
Managem-
ent, Public Administ-
ration, 
HRM 
Law, 
Strategic and Security 
Studies, 
History, 
Political 
Science, 
International Relations 
or 
other 
relevant 
subjects 
of 
Social 
Sciences from HEC 
recognized institution.   
 
 
(b) 22 years Research 
/Training/Teaching 
experience in recog-
nized 
training/ 
teaching/research 
institution 
For Serving Civil 
Servants  
 
22 years professional 
experience in public 
sector in BS-17 and 
above or equivalent 
with 
NMC 
or 
NS&WC qualified. 
50% 
through 
initial 
appoint-
ment and 50% 
by . appointment 
of serving civil 
servants 
Prime 
Minister 
40-55 years 
for 
initial 
appointment 
No age limit 
for serving 
civil 
servants  
appointed 
under Rule 
8(1) 
3. 
Directing 
Staff for 
SMC 
MP-I for the Chief 
Instructor and MP-
II for all others 
Initial appointment 
(a) M. Phil or 1st Class 
Master‘s 
Degree 
in 
Public 
Policy, 
Economics, 
Finance, 
Management, 
‗Public 
Administration, HRM, 
Law, 
Strategic 
and 
Security 
Studies, 
History, 
Political 
Science, 
International 
50% 
through 
initial 
appoint-
ment and 50% 
by  appointment 
of serving civil 
servants 
Prime 
Minister 
35-50 years 
for 
initial 
appointment 
No age limit 
for serving 
civil serva-
nts appoint-
ted 
under 
Rule 8 (1) 

Page - 708                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name 
Post 
Pay Scale 
Qualification & 
Experience 
Method of 
Appointment 
Appointing 
Authority 
Age Limit 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
Relations 
or 
other 
relevant 
subjects 
of 
Social Sciences from 
HEC 
recognized 
institution. 
 
(b) 17 years Research 
Training / Teaching 
experience in recogni-
zed training / teaching 
/ research institution. 
 
For Serving Civil 
Servants  
 
17 years professional 
experience in public 
Sector in BS-17 and 
above or equivalent 
with SMC qualified. 
4. 
Directing 
Staff for 
MCMC 
MP-II for Chief 
Instructor and MP-
III for all others 
Direct Recruitment 
(a) 1st  Class  Master‘s 
Degree in Public Racy; 
Economics, 
Finance, 
Management, 
Public 
Administration, 
HRM, 
Law, Strategic and Secu-
rity, Studies, History, 
Political Science, Inter-
national 
Relations 
or 
other relevant subjects of 
Social Sciences 
from 
HEC 
recognized 
institution. 
(b) 12 years Research / 
Training/Teaching 
experience in recogni-
zed training/ teaching 
/research institution.  
For 
Serving 
Civil 
Servants 
12 years professional 
experience in public 
sector in BS-17 and 
above 
or 
equivalent 
with MCMC qualified. 
50% through 
initial 
appointment 
and 50% by 
appointment 
of 
serving 
civil servants. 
 
Prime 
Minister 
30-45 years 
for 
initial 
appointment 
No age limit 
for serving 
civil serva-
nts appoint-
ted 
under 
Rule 8 (1) 
[Authority.— Establishment Division‘s S.R.O No. 126(I)/2017 dated 28-02-2017] 
 
 
11.1 
Promotion Related Capacity Building of  
Civil Servants in BPS 17 to BPS 19 of  
Various Occupational Groups/Services 
 
In order to ensure an optimum development of human resources available to the 
government, it is imperative that a continuous process of capacity building is so 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 709 
 
 
engineered that training becomes a regular, mandatory requirement, directly linked to 
vertical growth of civil servants.  In this context, the Chief Executive of Pakistan was 
pleased to decide that officers be trained in regular, short courses to equip them with 
skills and expertise relevant to their job. It has, therefore, been decided by the 
government that:– 
(a) 
Civil servants prospectively appointed to all Occupational Groups/ 
Services be required to undergo twelve days of short training course, each 
year after completing the initial common and specialized training 
programmes, in a pre-determined progressive mix of skills and concept 
courses; 
(b) 
Special focus will be given in Public Finance, Budget Preparation, 
Accounts etc., in addition to the relevant courses of each Occupational 
Group. Sample lists of which are annexed; 
(c) 
Officers presently serving in BPS 17 to BPS 19 be required to undergo 
twelve days of training, starting year, 2002 [till the year of their 
consideration for promotion to the next higher BPS]; and  
(d) 
Promotion to BPS 18, BPS 19 and BPS 20 be conditional, amongst other 
criteria, to an assessment of satisfactory participation in these courses. 
 
A sample list of short courses in skills and concepts development identified in 
consultation with various Ministries/ Divisions/Departments is annexed. All the 
administrative Ministries/ Divisions/Departments controlling the regularly constituted 
Occupational Groups, except Ministry of Foreign Affairs (in whose case policy would be 
announced later) are requested to arrange short training courses for their officers serving 
in BPS 17 to BPS 19, every year. 
[Authority.–Establishment Division‘s O.M.No.1/6/2002-CP.II, dated 5-4-2002]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
 Now Prime Minister. 
 Add ‗and service‘ 

Page - 710                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
(Annex 1) 
 
1.   COMMERCE AND TRADE GROUP 
 
Sl. No. 
Training Course 
Duration 
Training Institute 
1. 
a) 
Basis for International Trade 
b) 
International Marketing 
One week 
Foreign Trade Institute of 
Pakistan (FTIP) 
2. 
a) 
Trade Policies 
b) 
Trade Strategies 
One week 
Foreign Trade Institute of 
Pakistan (FTIP) 
3. 
a) 
National Trade Laws and 
Institution 
b) 
International Trade Laws and 
Institutions 
-do- 
-do- 
4. 
a)      Marketing Management 
b)      Marketing Research 
c)      Integration Marketing/Planning      
 
Execution 
-do- 
-do- 
5. 
Products Development 
-do- 
-do- 
6. 
a) 
Promotion of Trade and 
Investment 
b) 
Managing Trade Fairs/Exhibitions 
abroad for Trade promotion 
c) 
Post fairs follow-up & Analysis 
12 days 
-do- 
7. 
Organization Role and Functions of 
WTO and its Implications on 
Pakistan‘s Trade and Investment 
-do- 
FTIP/IBA 
8. 
Any other subject considered relevant by 
the controlling Division/Agency 
Duration not 
more than 12 
days 
 
 
2.   CUSTOMS AND EXCISE GROUP 
Sl. No. 
Training Course 
Duration 
Training Institute 
1. 
Customs laws and procedures 
One week 
Directorate of Customs & Excise & 
Sales Tax Karachi/Lahore/ Islamabad 
and other training institutes where the 
facility of training is available. 
                                                          
 World Trade Organization. 
 Institute of Business Administration. 
 Now Pakistan Customs Service. 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 711 
 
 
2. 
Levy and Assessment of duties/taxes, 
Exemption, Repayments, 
Warehousing, Transit and 
Transshipment 
-do- 
 
3. 
Import & Export Policies and 
Procedures and Concepts related to 
International Trade. 
-do- 
 
4. 
Sales Tax Laws & procedure 
-do- 
 
5. 
Prevention of Smuggling, Search, 
Seizure & arrest-Inquiries and 
Investigations 
-do- 
 
6. 
Central Excise Law and procedure 
-do- 
 
7. 
Financial Accounting for Tax 
Officers 
-do- 
 
8. 
Customs Baggage Rules 
-do- 
 
9. 
Basic Investigation Techniques 
-do- 
 
10. 
Any other subject considered 
relevant by the controlling 
Division/Agency 
Duration not 
more than 12 
days 
 
 
 
3.   PAKISTAN ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE  
Sl. No. 
Training Course 
Duration 
Training Institute 
1. 
Development Planning/Plan 
formulation, Planning Machinery 
in Pakistan 
One week 
Civil Services Academy NIMs, any other 
Training Institutes where the facility of 
Training is available. 
2. 
Feasibility Study, Project 
Preparation, Implementation 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
-do- 
 
3. 
Public Finance & Finance 
Management 
-do- 
 
4. 
Public Income, its Sources, Effects 
of Taxation on Production & 
Distribution 
-do- 
 
5. 
Public Expenditure, Objects & 
Classification, Effects of Public 
Expenditure on Production & 
Distribution 
-do- 
 
                                                          
 District Management Group renamed as ― Pakistan Administrative Service‖ vide Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No. 
6/3/2012 CP-II dated 21-05-2012.  

Page - 712                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
Sl. No. 
Training Course 
Duration 
Training Institute 
6. 
Public Debts General 
Characteristics 
-do- 
 
7. 
Principles of Audit & Role of 
Public Accounts Committee 
3 days 
 
8. 
Public Administration, Sector 
Management and concept of 
Public Governors 
-do- 
 
9. 
Decision Making 
-do- 
 
10. 
Devolution Plan 
-do- 
 
11. 
District Tehsil Administration 
-do- 
 
12. 
Local Government and Rural 
Development 
-do- 
 
13. 
Role of NGO in Development 
-do- 
 
14. 
Any other subject considered 
relevant by the controlling 
Division/Agency 
Duration not 
more than 12 
days 
 
 
4.    ECONOMISTS AND PLANNERS GROUP 
 
Sl. No. 
Training Course 
Duration 
Training Institute 
1. 
Course on Macro Economic Planning 
12 days 
PIDE* 
2. 
Course on Employment Income and 
Resource Mobilization 
-do- 
Pakistan Manpower Institute (PMI) 
3. 
Course on Human Resource 
Management 
-do- 
-do- 
4. 
General Course on Management 
-do- 
Pakistan Planning & Management 
Institute (PPMI) 
5. 
Course on Balance of Payments 
-do- 
*PIDE 
6. 
Course on Debt Management 
-do- 
*PIDE 
7. 
Any other subject considered relevant 
by the controlling Division/Agency 
Duration not 
more than 12 
days 
 
 
                                                          
* Pakistan Institute of Development Economics. 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 713 
 
 
5.  INLAND REVENUE SERVICE 
Sl. No. 
Training Course 
Duration 
Training Institute 
1. 
Income Tax Law 
One week 
Directorate of Training and Research 
(Income Tax), Lahore 
2. 
Investigative Techniques and 
Commercial Practices 
-do- 
-do- 
3. 
Accountancy, Book Keeping and 
Auditing 
-do- 
-do- 
4. 
Knowledge of Computers/ 
Information Technology 
-do- 
-do- 
5. 
Advance Management Programme 
12 days 
Pakistan Institute of Management 
Karachi/Lahore 
6. 
Financial Management Course 
One week 
-do- 
7. 
Skills in Administrative Matters 
One week 
Pakistan 
Institute 
of 
Management 
Karachi/Lahore 
8. 
Streamlining Administrative 
Procedure and Paperwork 
-do- 
-do- 
9. 
Course in Financial Management for 
DDOs or Equivalent Rank 
-do- 
NIM, Karachi 
10. 
Finance and Accounting for non 
Financial Executives 
-do- 
Pakistan 
Institute 
of 
Management, 
Lahore/Karachi 
11. 
Any other subject considered 
relevant by the controlling 
Division/Agency 
Duration not 
more than 12 
days 
 
6.    INFORMATION GROUP 
Sl. No. 
Training Course 
Duration 
Training Institute 
1. 
Duties of Press Officers Abroad 
One week 
Information Service Academy, PTV 
Academy or any other Training Institute 
where the facility of Training is 
available. 
2. 
Projecting Kashmir Abroad 
One week 
 
3. 
Conflict Resolution 
One week 
 
4. 
Mass Communication As Agent of 
Socio-Cultural Change 
3 days 
 
5. 
International Media and Dealing 
with Foreign Correspondents 
3 days 
 
6. 
Publicity, Public Relations and 
International Relations 
One week 
 
                                                          
  Income Tax Group renamed as Inland Revenue Service. 
 Drawing and Disbursing Officer. See for reference ‗A Hand Book for Drawing & Disbursing Officers‘, 
 
PPARC, Management Services Wing, Establishment Division. 

Page - 714                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
Sl. No. 
Training Course 
Duration 
Training Institute 
7. 
Media Diplomacy and New World 
Order 
One week 
 
8. 
International News Agencies and 
their Role in World Politics 
One week 
 
9. 
Any other subject considered 
relevant by the controlling 
Division/Agency 
Duration not 
more than 12 
days 
 
 
7.   MILITARY LANDS & CANTONMENTS GROUP 
 
Sl. No. 
Training Course 
Duration 
Training Institute 
1. 
Cantonment Act, 1924 
One week 
NIMs, CSA* or any other training 
institute where the facility of training is 
available. 
2. 
Cantonment Property Rules 
-do- 
 
3. 
Cantonment Servants Rules, 1955 
-do- 
 
4. 
Cantonment Election Petition Rules 
1997 
-do- 
 
5. 
Administration & Management of 
Government Land Inside and Outside 
Cantonment 
-do- 
 
6. 
Acquisition & Requisitioning of Land 
or Property for the purpose of 
Federation 
-do- 
 
7. 
Resumption, Requisitioning Sale of 
Property for Defence Services 
-do- 
 
8. 
Any other subject considered relevant 
by the controlling Division/Agency 
Duration 
not more 
than 12 
days 
 
8.   OFFICE MANAGEMENT GROUP 
Sl. No. 
Training Course 
Duration 
Training Institute 
1. 
Financial Management 
One Week 
STI**, PCB***, NIM, PIM@ or any 
other Training Institute where the 
facility is available. 
2. 
Cash Management 
-do- 
 
3. 
Office Management 
-do- 
 
4. 
Stress Management 
3 days 
 
5. 
Time Management 
3 days 
 
6. 
Budgeting & Financial Control 
One week 
 
                                                          
*Civil Services Academy. 
** Secretariat Training Institute. 
*** Pakistan Computer Bureau. 
@ Pakistan Institute of Management. 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 715 
 
 
7. 
Communication Skills 
-do- 
 
8. 
Legal drafting 
-do- 
 
9. 
Service Rules 
12 days 
 
10. 
Any other subject considered relevant 
by the controlling Division/Agency 
Duration 
not more 
than 12 
days 
 
9.  *PAKISTAN AUDIT & ACCOUNTS SERVICE 
Sl. No. 
Training Course 
Duration 
Training Institute 
I. 
ACCOUNTING 
 
 
 
1. 
Introduction to Chart of 
Classification 
3 days 
Audit & Accounts, Training 
Institutes, Lahore, Islamabad, 
Peshawar, Karachi & Railways 
Accounts Academy, Quetta. 
 
2. 
Compilation of Monthly & Annual 
Accounts 
-do- 
 
 
3. 
Reconciliation of Accounts 
-do- 
 
 
4. 
Appropriation and Finance 
Accounts 
-do- 
 
II. 
AUDIT 
 
 
 
1. 
Value for Money Audit 
3 days 
 
 
2. 
Issue in Managing Performance 
Audit 
2 days 
 
 
3. 
INTOSAL Auditing Standards 
-do- 
 
 
4. 
Stage of Development of Project 
-do- 
 
 
5. 
Planning for Performance Audit 
-do- 
 
 
6. 
Audit Execution 
5 days 
 
 
7. 
Financial Analysis 
2 days 
 
 
8. 
Audit of Programme 
-do- 
 
 
9. 
Certification Audit 
6 days 
 
 
10. 
Evaluation of Internal Controls 
-do- 
 
 
11. 
Report Writing 
2 days 
 
 
12. 
Reporting Reviewing Concept & 
Practical 
-do- 
 
 
13. 
Audit of Revenue Receipts 
3 days 
 
 
14. 
Any other subject considered 
Relevant by the controlling 
Division/Agency  
During not 
more than 12 
days 
 
                                                          
* Renamed vide Establishment Division OM No. 1/17/92-CP.II, dated 10.12.2002. 

Page - 716                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
10.   POLICE SERVICE OF PAKISTAN 
Sl. No. 
Training Course 
Duration 
Training Institute 
1. 
Crisis Management 
3 days 
National Police Academy, or any 
other 
Training 
Institute 
where 
facility of training is available. 
2. 
Traffic Management & Road Safety 
3 days 
 
3. 
Relation with Prosecution & Prison 
Administration 
3 days 
 
4. 
Usage of Information Technology in 
Policing Welfare 
3 days 
 
5. 
Various Systems of Policing 
One week 
 
6. 
Policing by Objectives 
3 days 
 
7. 
Crime Scene Management/Major 
Disorder(s) 
3 days 
 
8. 
Modern Concepts and Methods of 
Patrolling 
3 days 
 
9. 
Interviewing & Interrogating Skills 
3 days 
 
10. 
Preparation & Scrutiny of Challans 
3 days 
 
11. 
Monitoring of Bails, Acquittals and 
Conviction in Important Cases 
One week 
 
12. 
Native & Scope of Criminology, Modern 
Theories of Crime 
One week 
 
13. 
White Collar Crime & Penology* 
One week 
 
14. 
Any other subject considered relevant by 
the controlling Ministry/Division/ Agency 
Duration not 
more than 12 
days 
 
11.   POSTAL GROUP 
Sl. No. 
Training Course 
Duration 
Training Institute 
1. 
Budgeting & Financial Management 
One week 
Postal Staff College or any other 
training institute where the training 
facility is available. 
2. 
Labour Management Relations 
-do- 
 
3. 
Post Office Costing Studies 
-do- 
 
4. 
Postal Management 
-do- 
 
5. 
Postal Statistics 
-do- 
 
6. 
Establishment of Special Services with 
reference to 
-do- 
 
                                                          
* The study of punishment in relation to crime; the management of prisons [Chambers 20th Century Dictionary, 
1981]. 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 717 
 
 
(a)  State of Existing Services 
(b)  Competition with Courier Services 
7. 
Importance of Post – Socio-Economic 
Development 
-do- 
 
8. 
Any other subject considered relevant by  
controlling Division/Agency 
Duration not 
more than 12 
days 
 
12.   RAILWAYS (COMMERCIAL AND TRANSPORTATION) GROUP 
Sl. No. 
Training Course 
Duration 
Training Institute 
1. 
Project Management 
One week 
PIM*/LUMS**, 
or 
any 
other 
training institute where the training 
facility is available. 
2. 
Presentation Skills for Management 
One week 
 
3. 
Preparation of Marketing Plan 
One week 
 
4. 
Development Marketing Skills 
One week 
 
5. 
Management Course for Junior 
Executives 
One week 
 
6. 
Financial Management for Non-
Financial Management 
One week 
 
7. 
Any other subject considered relevant by 
the controlling Division/Agency 
Duration not 
more than 
12 days 
 
13.   SECRETARIAT GROUP 
Sl. No. 
Training Course 
Duration 
Training Institute 
1. 
Rules/Laws Applicable to Civil Servants 
(Module-I) 
One week 
Secretariat 
Training 
Institute/ 
NIM/CSA 
or 
any 
other 
Training 
Institute 
where 
the 
facility is available. 
2. 
Rules/Laws Applicable to Civil Servants 
(Module-II) 
One week 
 
3. 
Economy of Pakistan 
One week 
 
4. 
Preparation of Development Schemes 
One week 
 
5. 
Project Appraisal, Formulation & 
Monitoring 
One week 
 
6. 
International Relations 
One week 
 
7. 
Human Resource Management 
One week 
 
8. 
Management Information System 
One week 
 
9. 
Legal Drafting 
One week 
 
10. 
Financial Management & Budgeting 
One week 
 
11. 
Decision Making 
One week 
 
12. 
Any other subject considered relevant by 
the controlling Division/Agency 
Duration not 
more than 12 
days 
 
 
 
                                                          
*Pakistan Institute of Management. 
**Lahore University of Management Services. 
 National Institute of Public Administration; Civil Services Academy. 

Page - 718                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
(ANNEX-2) 
 
 
SHORT COURSES FOR CONCEPT DEVELOPMENT FOR OFFICERS  
IN BPS 18 AND 19 OF ALL GROUPS/SERVICES 
 
Sl. No. 
Training Course 
Duration 
Training Institution 
1. 
Reconciliation of Accounts 
3 days 
Audit & Accounts Training Institute, 
Karachi/ 
Lahore/Islamabad/Peshawar, 
Railways Accounts Academy Quetta. 
2. 
Financial Analysis 
2 days 
-do- 
3. 
Planning for Performance Audit 
2 days 
-do- 
4. 
Communication Skills 
3 days 
P.I.M, NIM 
5. 
I.T & E.Govt. 
One week 
P.C.B, NIMs, PASC 
6. 
Human Resource Management 
One week 
NIM/STI 
7. 
Introduction of Customs Laws 
3 days 
Directorate of Customs & Excise & Sales 
Tax 
8. 
Sales Tax & Procedure 
3 days 
-do- 
9. 
Central Excise Laws 
3 days 
-do- 
10. 
Import & Export Policies 
3 days 
-do- 
11. 
Total Quality Management 
3 days 
CSA/NIMs/PIM 
12. 
Devolution Plan 
3 days 
-do- 
13. 
Local Government & 
Development 
3 days 
-do- 
14. 
Problem Solving & Decision- 
Making 
3 days 
CSA/NIMs/PIM 
15. 
Macro Economic Planning 
3 days 
PIDE 
16. 
Basic Income Tax Laws 
3 days 
Directorate of Training (Income Tax 
Lahore) 
17. 
Mass Communication 
One week 
Information Academy 
18. 
Media Diplomacy & New World 
Order 
One week 
-do- 
19. 
Financial Management 
One week 
NIM, CSA,STI 
20. 
Office Management 
One week 
Information Academy. 
21. 
Legal Drafting 
One week 
-do- 
22. 
Preparation of Budget 
One week 
-do- 
23. 
Stress Management 
One week 
NIM/CSA/PIM 
24. 
Crisis Management 
One week 
National Police Academy, CSA, NIMs 
25. 
Labour Management 
One week 
NILAT Karachi 
26. 
Marketing Skills 
One week 
PIM, Karachi/NIM 
27. 
Civil Servants Act and (APT*) 
Rules 
One week 
STI/NIMs 
                                                          
* Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973. Hence APT. 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 719 
 
 
Sl. No. 
Training Course 
Duration 
Training Institution 
28. 
Efficiency & Discipline Rules & 
Removal from Service (Special 
Powers) Ordinance 2000 
One week 
-do- 
29. 
Preparation of Development 
Schemes 
One week 
NIMs/PIDE 
30. 
Project Appraisal, Formulation & 
Monitoring 
One week 
NIMs/PIDE 
31. 
Management Information System 
One week 
NIM/PASC 
32. 
International Relations 
One week 
CSA/Staff College FSA 
33. 
Investment Analysis & 
Economic Management 
One week 
PASC/NIMs/PIDE 
34. 
Training of Trainers 
One week 
PASC/NIMs 
35. 
Environmental Preservation 
One week 
NIM/PASC 
36. 
Role of Women in Rural 
Development 
One week 
PARD/NCRD* 
37. 
Rural Development 
Administration 
One week 
PARD/NCRD* 
38. 
International Economics  
One week 
NIMs/PIDE 
39. 
Financial Management of 
Development Projects 
One week 
-do- 
40. 
Business Communication 
One week 
PIM/NIMs 
41. 
Human Rights 
One week 
NIMs/STI 
42. 
Poverty & Public Policy 
One week 
CSA/NIM/PASC/NCRD* 
43. 
Public Relations 
One week 
CSA/NIM/PASC 
44. 
Production & Operation 
Management 
One week 
-do- 
45. 
Ethics & Public Policies 
One week 
-do- 
46. 
Social Welfare Policies 
One week 
-do- 
47. 
Role of NGOs in Rural 
Development 
One week 
PARD/NIM/NCRD** 
48. 
Gender & Governance 
One week 
NIMs/CSA/PASC 
49. 
Communicating Effectively 
through Print Media 
One week 
Information Academy 
50. 
Negotiation Skills 
One week 
NIM/PIM 
51. 
Human Resource Planning 
One week 
NIM/PASC 
52. 
Training Need Assessment 
One week 
NIM/PASC 
                                                          
 Removal from Service (Special Powers) Ordinance, 2000 has been ceased to exit. 
**National Centre for Rural Development. 

Page - 720                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
Sl. No. 
Training Course 
Duration 
Training Institution 
53. 
Internet Training 
One week 
PCB/NIM/PASC 
54. 
Effective Record Management 
One week 
STI/NIM/PIM 
55. 
Stores/Purchase Procedure 
One week 
STI/NIM 
56. 
Time Management 
One week 
NIM/CSA/PIM 
57. 
Concept of ISO, 9000 
One week 
PIM 
58. 
Treasury Rules 
One week 
STI/NIMs 
59. 
General Financial Rules 
One week 
NIM/PIM 
60. 
Principles of Good Management 
One week 
-do- 
61. 
Interpersonal Communication 
One week 
-do- 
62. 
Public Relations for Front Line 
Officials 
One week 
-do- 
63. 
Management of Public Records 
One week 
-do- 
64. 
Organizational Behaviour 
One week 
-do- 
65. 
General Principles of Modern 
Government with Special 
Reference to Global Capitalism 
& Role of World Bank, IMF  
Vis-à-Vis, UNO 
One week 
NIM/CSA/PIM 
66. 
The Genesis and Applications of 
the Idea of Good Governance 
versus Bureaucracy 
One week 
NIM/CSA/PIM 
67. 
Human Resource Development 
One week 
STI, PIM, NIM 
68. 
Information Technology  and 
Office Automation 
12 days 
PCB/NIM 
69. 
Management Concept and their 
Application in Third World 
Countries 
One week 
NIM/PIM 
70. 
Concept of Privatisation of Post 
Merits & De-Merits 
One week 
Postal Staff College 
71. 
Computer Literacy/Office-2000 
One week 
PCB/NIM 
72. 
Constitution of Pakistan 
One week 
NIM/CSA 
73. 
Microsoft Office 
One week 
PCB/NIM 
74. 
Out-look 
2 days 
-do- 
75. 
Web-page Designing 
2 days 
-do- 
76. 
Local Area Network (LAN) 
2 days 
-do- 
77. 
Management Theory & Practice 
One week 
NIM/PIM 
78. 
(a) 
Financial Management 
(b) Information Technology, & 
E-Commerce and MIS 
6 days 
 
6 days 
FTIP/PIM/IBA 
[Note– 
The list of above training institutions is tentative. Training may be arranged as per available 
training facilities at any training institutions in the relevant field at the nearest station]. 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 721 
 
 
11.2 
Criteria for Nomination of Officers to National Management 
College/National Institute of Management (NIMs) 
 
Refer to the subject noted above and to state that the competent authority i.e. 
Secretary, Establishment Division has been pleased to approve the following criteria/ 
guidelines for mandatory courses i.e. Mid-Career Management Course (MCMC), Senior 
Management Course (SMC) and National Management Course (NMC)/National Security 
and War Course (NS&WC) 2020-21 as under:— 
 
(i) 
Officer(s) is/are in BS-18/19/20 or equivalent on regular basis. 
 
(ii) 
The Officer(s) is/are in the promotion zone.  
(iii) 
The officers may be considered in order of seniority in their respective 
cadres and the officers otherwise senior to them should not be ignored.  
(iv)   The officers who are on deputation in international organizations, may not 
 be nominated. Similarly, officer posted in Pakistan‘s Missions abroad, 
 except those belonging to Foreign Service of Pakistan, may also not be 
 nominated.  
(v)  The officers on long leave/EOL and are undergoing disciplinary 
 proceedings may not be nominated. However, those accused officers 
 whose disciplinary proceedings are pending for over one year may also be 
 nominated.  
2. 
The following documents are also required in respect of each nominee:— 
(i) 
Panel Proforma duly filled in (Annex-I) & (Annex-II). 
(ii) 
Detailed bio-data.  
(iii) 
Copy of valid seniority list of officer in BS-18/19/20. 
(iv) 
Certificate to the effect that no disciplinary proceedings are pending against 
 
the nominees. However, those accused officers whose disciplinary 
 
proceedings are pending for over one year are exempted.  
(v) 
Latest annual medical examination report in respect of nominees.  
(vi) 
Certificate to the effect that no junior officer has been nominated for the 
 
course.  
[Authority:— Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 2/4/2020-T-I (Pt) dated 25-09-2020.] 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page - 722                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
ANNEX-I 
CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
      As on                    2022 
NAME 
 SERVICE/GROUP     DOMICILE     DATE OF JOINING SERVICE 
 
 
 
Training Courses  
 
Grade Achieved  
Penalties if any imposed 
Under E&D Rules Removal from Service (Special Power) Ordinance,2000. 
Posting held: 
BS-17-18 
BS-19 
BS-20  
 
 
Postal/Present Address 
Mobile/Office Contact No. 
Email Address 
 
 
                                                                          Signature/Stamp of 
  
 
 
 
           Administrative Authority 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Date of Birth 
  
 
 
 
Date of Superannuation  
Qualification 
 
Date of Promotion 
BS-18 
       BS-19 
     BS-18  

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 723 
 
 
ANNEX-II 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
No. of 
Sanctioned/duty 
posts in BS-20 
No. of 
Officers 
who have 
attended 
presently 
attending 
NMC/NDU 
No. of 
officers who 
have not 
attended 
NMC/NDU 
No. of 
sanctioned/duty 
posts in BS-21 the 
cadre/Group/Service 
No. of 
vacancies in 
BS-21 
likely to 
occur in 
next 1 year 
Any other 
relevant 
information 
 
                                                                                        Signature/Stamp of 
  
 
 
 
           Administrative Authority 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page - 724                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
11.3 
Nomination of Officers of Autonomous/ 
Semi-Autonomous Bodies Equivalent to  
BS-18, BS-19 & BS-20 for MCMC,SMC & NMC 
 
Refer to above subject and to state that it has been decided that if the Autonomous 
/Semi-Autonomous Bodies under the administrative control of Federal Government/ 
Provincial Government/AJ&K Government intend that their officers equivalent to                    
BS-18,BS-19 & BS-20 undergo training courses like MCMC, SMC and NMC at National 
School of Public Policy alongwith Civil Servants, they shall be allowed, as and when these 
courses are circulated subject to fulfillment of the prescribed criteria. The nominations of 
such officers should be forwarded through administrative Ministries/Divisions. 
[Authority:- Establishment Division‘s O.M. No. 8/5/2014-T-VI dated 13-05-2015]. 
 
11.4 
Annual Medical Examination Reports- 
Fitness of a Civil Servant for Posting,  
Training and Retention in Service 
 
Refer to the instructions contained at paras 4.14 to 4.26 of the Booklet ― A Guide 
to Performance Evaluation,2004‖ regarding Annual Medical Examination Reports in 
respect of the officers in BS-17 & above in the Federal Government. It has been observed 
that the said instructions are not being complied with, therefore, it becomes difficult to 
monitor an officer‘s health for the purpose of posting, training and retention in service. 
Besides, several cases have been observed where officers nominated for mandatory training 
fell seriously ill during training and had to be sent back without completing the training. 
 
2. 
It is, therefore, advised that the instructions referred in pre-para may be 
complied with and Annual Medical Examination of every officer be ensured. As the Annual 
Medical Examination Reports are to be placed in the C.R. dossiers, copy of the Reports 
may be forwarded to the authorities responsible for maintaining C.R. dossiers. 
 
3. 
Apropos to above, it has been decided that the latest Medical Report shall 
henceforth be a compulsory requirement at the time of nomination of officers for 
mandatory training i.e. MCMC,SMC and NMC/NDU. While sending nomination of 
officers for mandatory training, their latest Annual Medical Examination Report may also 
be furnished to the Establishment Division. However, the said requirement shall be 
applicable w.e.f. 1st January,2014. 
 
4. 
The Ministries/Divisions are requested to bring the aforesaid decision of the 
Competent Authority to the notice of all concerned including Attached Departments/Sub-
ordinate Offices under their administrative control for information and compliance. 
 [Authority:— Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.10/1/2012-CP-II dated 17-07-2013] 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 725 
 
 
IV.   MISCELLANEOUS INSTRUCTIONS 
 
12.1 Grant of BS-21 and BS-22 to Technical/Professional 
 
 
Officers on Account of Meritorious Services 
 
Following revised criteria as approved by the Prime Minister for grant of BS-
21/22 on the basis of meritorious service was circulated vide this Division 
O.M.No.8/1/2008-CP-V dated 25th November, 2008:— 
a. 
Officers be considered for grant of BS-21 & BS-22 on the basis of 
meritorious service in order of seniority. 
b. 
PERs should be quantified in present and previous scales as per existing 
promotion policy and assigned a weightage of 70%. 
c. 
Training from NIPA, Staff College and National Institute of Management 
may be given 15% weightage. In case the training information/ 
requirement is not relevant, overall professional competence be judged 
and notional marks be assigned on the basis of his previous record. 
d. 
22 years service in BS-17 and above for grant of BS-22 to technical and 
professional officers on meritorious service with the addition that the 
officer concerned should also complete at-least two years service in a post 
in Basic Scale 21 for the said grant. 
e. 
The Special Selection Committee shall scrutinize Significant Contribution 
of the Technical and Professional Officers in their relevant fields of 
specialization, 
consulting 
Secretary 
concerned 
and 
head 
of 
Offices/Organizations about the background, level of competence and 
general reputation and allocate marks out of 15 to the officers being 
considered for grant of BS-21 and BS-22 on the basis of meritorious 
services. 
f. 
Minimum threshold in this way shall be 75% Marks. 
 
2. 
In order to prepare a Working Paper for Special Selection Committee, all 
the Ministries/Divisions are requested to forward proposals in respect of their 
recommendees in eight sets each for consideration for grant of BS-21 and BS-22 to 
technical and professional officers under their administrative control, to this Division in 
accordance with the following procedure:- 
a. 
The proposal should be submitted on the following proformae copies 
enclosed:— 
i. 
Proforma-I duly signed by the Secretary of the administrative 
Division. 
ii. 
Proforma-II (Panel Proforma) devised with the concurrence of 
Finance Division. 
iii. 
P.E.R. Grading & Quantification Form. 
b. 
Proforma-II (Panel Proforma) to be used for grant of BS-21 or BS-22 with 
appropriate modifications. 
                                                          
 Now NIM. 

Page - 726                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
c. 
The proposal should include only the names of eligible officers in line with 
Finance Division O.M.No.F.2(3)-R.3/86 dated 7th April,1987 and Estt. 
Division O.M.No.F.8/1/2008-CP-V dated 25th November, 2008. 
d. 
Following information/documents must also be provided:- 
(i) 
Total number of sanctioned BS-20 technical posts in the Division. 
(ii) 
The number of pool posts (12½ % of the total posts). 
(iii) The posts already occupied (officers in position). 
(iv) The number of pool posts actually vacant.  
(v) 
Seniority-wise List of officers on the panel. 
(vi) Justifications for ignoring senior officers (if applicable). 
(vii) The proposed officer fulfills all the conditions enumerated in the 
annexure to this letter 
(viii) A BS-20 officer must sign the documents and furnish a certificate 
that all the contents are verified and the proposed officers fulfill all 
the criteria enumerated in the O.M. referred to in para 1 above. 
(ix) The category of Technical/Professional Officers as enumerated in 
Panel Proforma for Special Selection Committee is required to be 
mentioned for the nominated officer. 
(x) 
The officer holds the technical post in the cadre concerned on 
regular basis and possesses professional/technical qualification as 
laid down in the recruitment rules. 
e. 
The proposals for grant of BS-21 & 22 on meritorious basis to the officers 
belonging to autonomous/semi-autonomous bodies under their control, 
Ministries/Divisions, be processed in line with Finance Division‘s O.M. 
No.F.2(3)-R.3/86 dated 13th October,1988 also indicating that these bodies 
have adopted the Basic Pay Schemes including allowances and benefits. 
 
3. 
The proposals, if any, should reach the Establishment Division within two 
weeks from the date of issue of this Office Memorandum. Incomplete proposals as well 
as those received after due date will not be included in the agenda of the meeting. 
  
[Authority:- Establishment Division‘s O.M.No.8/2/2011-CP-5 dated 03-10-2012]. 
12.2 Clarification Regarding Revision of Policy for Grant of  
BS-21 and BS-22 to Technical and Professional officers 
on the basis of Meritorious Services 
 
This Division‘s O.M of even number dated 25th November, 2008 on the above 
subject regarding policy for grant of BS-21 and BS-22 to technical and professional officers 
on the basis of meritorious services and to say that criteria for grant of BS-21 and BS-22 to 
technical and professional officers on the basis of meritorious services to the extent of length 
of service has been modified with the approval of competent authority as under:— 
 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 727 
 
 
 
For BS-22 
Twenty two years service in Basic Scale 17 and above excluding the period of 
suspension not counted as duty and extraordinary leave and has completed at least 
two years in a post in Basic Scale 21. 
For BS-21 
  
Twenty two years service in Basic Scale 17 and above excluding the period of 
suspension not counted as duty and extraordinary leave and has completed at least 
two years in a post in Basic Scale 20. 
 
2. 
The other terms and conditions for the said grant contained in Finance 
Division O.M No. F. 2(3)-R 3/86 dated 7th April, 1987 and Establishment Division O.M No. 
8/2/97-CP-4 dated 29th December, 2001 read with Establishment Division‘s O.M of even 
number dated 25th November, 2008 shall remain in force as heretofore. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. F. 8/1/2008/CP-V dated 4-10-2012]. 
 
12.3 Grant of BS-21 to Technical and Professional  
Officers on Account of Meritorious Service 
  
Refer to Finance Division‘s O.M.No.F.2(3)R-3/86 dated 07-04-1987 on the above 
subject and to state that appointment and conditions of service of a person are required to be 
determined in the case of services of a Province and posts in connection with the affairs of a 
Province by or under Act of the Provincial Assembly in terms of Article 240(b) and Article 
142(c) of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan,1973. 
 
2. 
In view of the above, the decision to grant a higher grade to an employee of a 
provincial service on meritorious basis falls within the competence of the concerned 
Provincial Government and such cases do not require any order from the Federal 
Government, as already conveyed by Establishment Division vide their letter No.8/2/97-CP-
5 dated 16-11-2002 (Annexure). 
 
3. 
Finance Division‘s O.M. under reference containing modalities for grant of 
BPS-21 & 22 to technical and professional officers of Provincial services may be treated to 
have been amended to the extent as indicated at para-2 above.  
[Authority:- Finance Division‘s O.M.No.F.3(5) R-4/2009 dated 2nd April,2015]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page - 728                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN 
CABINET SECRETARIAT 
ESTABLISHMENT DIVISION 
***** 
 
No.8/2/97-CP-5         
 
               Islamabad, the 16th November,2002. 
 
From: 
 
Mr. Muhammad Wishaq, 
 
 
Section Officer (CP-5) 
 
 
Tel: 9202534. 
 
To: 
 
The Chief Secretary, 
 
 
Government of Punjab, 
 
 
Lahore. 
 
 
 
The Chief Secretary, 
 
 
Government of Sindh, 
 
 
Karachi. 
 
 
 
The Chief Secretary, 
 
 
Government of NWFP, 
 
 
Peshawar. 
 
 
 
The Chief Secretary, 
 
 
Government of Baluchistan, 
 
 
Quetta. 
 
Subject:-  
GRANT OF BS-21/22 TO THE TECHNICAL/PROFESSIONAL OFFICERS 
IN SPECIALLY MERITORIOUS CASES. 
 
Dear Sir, 
 
 
 
I am directed to refer to Finance Division O.M.No.F.2(3)-R-3/86 dated 7th April,1987 
and Establishment Division O.M.No.8/2/97-CP-5 dated 29-12-2001 the subject noted above and to say 
that appointment and conditions of service of a person are required to be determined in the case of 
services of a Province and posts in connection with the affairs of a Province by or under Act of the 
Provincial Assembly in terms of Article 240(b) and Article 142(c) of the Constitution of Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan,1973. 
 
 
2. 
In view of above, the decision to grant of higher grade to an employee of a provincial 
service on meritorious basis falls within the competence of the concerned Provincial Government and 
case does not require any order from the Federal Government.  
 
 
3. 
This issues with the approval of the competent authority. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               Yours faithfully, 
 
        (MUHAMMAD WISHAQ) 
             SECTION OFFICER 
                                                          
 Now K.P.K. 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 729 
 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
Ref. Sl.No.12.3 
 
PROFORMA-I  
GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN 
MINISTRY OF ___________ 
 
PROFORMA FOR SUBMISSION OF PROPOSALS FOR 
 GRANT OF BS-21 OR 22 TO TECHNICAL AND 
 PROFESSIONAL OFFICERS 
 
S. 
No. 
Particulars of 
Posts/officers as on 
Main 
Ministry/ 
Division 
Attached 
Department 
Federal 
Subordinate 
Offices 
Total 
Columns 
3,4&5 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
i. 
Total number of technical/ professional 
posts sanctioned in BS-21. 
 
 
 
 
ii. 
Total number of technical/ professional 
posts sanctioned in BS-20. 
 
 
 
 
iii. Total number of officers holding 
technical/ professional posts in BS-21 
on regular basis. 
 
 
 
 
iv. Total number of officers holding 
technical/ professional posts in BS-20 
on regular basis. 
 
 
 
 
v. 
Pool posts @ 12.5% of the total number 
of posts in BS-20 (i.e. of (ii) above). 
 
 
 
 
 
To be signed by……………….. 
(Head of the Ministry/Division/ 
Department or an officer of the status   
of a Joint Secretary BS-20  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page - 730                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
Ref. Sl.No.12.1 
 
PROFORMA-II  
MINISTRY OF_______________ 
 
PANEL PROFORMA FOR  
SPECIAL SELECTION COMMITTEE  
FOR GRANT OF BS-21/22 TO BS-20/21 TECHNICAL  
AND PROFESSIONAL OFFICERS  
ON ACCOUNT OF MERITORIOUS SERVICES  
AS ON _____________________ 
 
Name of the officer 
 
Date of Birth 
 
Domicile 
 
Seniority No. 
 
Service/Cadre to which he 
belongs 
 
Nomenclature & BS of the post held 
 
Technical 
Qualification 
& 
Experience Prescribed in the 
Recruitment Rules for the 
post. 
 
Technical Qualification & 
Experience possessed by the officer. 
Add as Annex-II 
if required. 
Job description of the post 
held by the officer 
 
Performance indicators prescribed for 
the post. 
Add as Annex-II 
if required.  
The 
achievements 
of 
the 
officer in specific measurable 
terms during last 03 years, 
Add as 
Annex-III 
if required. 
Particulars of publications. Details 
research papers/books authored by 
the officer with the names of journals 
in which research papers were 
published.  
Add as Annex-IV 
if required.  
Reasons for which the officer 
is to be considered as specially 
meritorious. 
Add as 
Annex-V if 
required. 
Details of significant contribution 
made by the officer in his field of 
specialization. 
 
 
 
SERVICE PARTICULARS 
 
Date of Joining 
Government 
Service 
Date of Promotion in 
Length of Service 
Eligibility for 
consideration 
Present 
Scale    
BS-20 
Lower Ranks 
BS-19 BS-18 
BS-17 
Service 
In the 
Cadre 
In Present 
Scale 
Total 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Y 
M 
Y 
M 
Y 
M 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IMPORTANT APPOINTMENTS HELD IN THE PRESENT RANK 
S.No. 
Post Held 
S.No. 
Post Held 
1. 
 
2. 
 
Penalties (if any) 
 
: 
 
Training Courses (other than 
Mandatory Training, if any) 
 
: 
 
Grading of Mandatory Training at 
NIPA/SMC, if done 
 
: 
 
NUMBER OF PERS 
                                                          
 Now NIM. 
 
Photo 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 731 
 
 
Basic Scale 
Outstanding 
Very 
Good 
Good 
Average 
Reports 
Below 
Average 
Adverse Report/ 
Remarks in BS-19 
BS-19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BS-20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Awaited 
Reports (PERs) 
Additional Information 
 
 
EFFICIENCY INDEX 
Required 
Threshold 
Score of PERs & 
Training Reports 
 
Marks awarded by 
SSC 
Total 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendations of Special Selection Committee 
Promoted 
Deferred 
Superseded 
 
 
 
 
 
          Prepared by 
 
 
 
 
 
Checked by 
(Section Officer or Equivalent 
 
 
 
(Deputy Secretary or Equivalent) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page - 732                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
ANNEXURE-III 
Ref. Sl.No.12.1 
 
PER GRADING & QUANTIFICATION FORM 
 
Name: 
 
Year 
Post held 
Min/Div/ 
Deptt. 
Period of 
PER 
PER’S 
Assessment 
Fitness for 
Promotion 
 Score 
 
 
 
From 
To 
By RO 
By CO 
 
 
Previous Scale (BS-19/20) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Aggregate Score= 
Present Scale (BS-20/21) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CALCULATION OF SCORE 
A. PERs Quantified 
Score 60:40  
@ 70% 
Basic Scale 
Aggregate 
Score 
Weightage 
Factor 
Points 
Obtained 
Present Scale 
 
 
 
Previous Scale 
 
 
 
i. Additions 
ii.  Deletions  
 
 
 
Total (A):- 
 
 
 
B. Training: 
@ 15 % 
NIPA/NMC 
 
 
 
LHR 
KAR 
QTA 
PSH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C. Grand Total (A+B) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           Prepared by  
 
 
 
 
 
Checked by 
(Superintendent or Equivalent) 
 
 
 
 
    (Section Officer or Equivalent) 
 
Countersigned by 
(Deputy Secretary or Equivalent) 
Sl.No. 13 
Knowledge of Islamic/Pakistan Studies  
 
The President was pleased to direct vide CMLA Secretariat‘s directive No. 270 of 
1981 that:— 
―Various systems and methods of selection are in vogue for inducting individuals in 
the government at different levels. At the higher level, selection is made by the 
Public Service Commissions.  Separate criteria are prescribed for induction at each 
level.  In all these systems and procedures, one thing must be common, that is, 
assessment of the candidate‘s knowledge of Islamic and Pakistan Studies.  Persons 
without adequate knowledge of these subjects will not be considered fit for 
appointment to government jobs, irrespective of their proficiency in other fields. 
Necessary instructions will be issued; as executive orders, immediately, and 
implementation by all concerned ensured. If an Ordinance is considered to be 
                                                          
 Now NIM. 

  CHAPTER-7                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               Page - 733 
 
 
necessary to give effect to this directive or would help to make its implementation 
more effective, it may be prepared and submitted to me‖. 
 
2.  
The matter has been examined in the Establishment Division and it has been 
decided that the existing rules give the Chairman, FPSC and the Departmental Selection 
Committees adequate powers to prescribe the qualifications for inducting individuals in 
government departments. There is, therefore, no need for any change in the rules. 
 
3. 
All selection authorities, however, will ensure that a certain percentage of the 
marks in any interview/examination carried out for induction of individuals into the 
government service will be reserved for Islamic and Pakistan Studies. Persons scoring less 
than pass marks in these subjects will not be considered fit for appointment to government 
jobs, irrespective of their proficiency in other fields. 
 [Authority:– Estt. Secretary‘s D.O. No.4/14/81-TI, dated 24-6-1981]. 
Sl.No. 14 
 
Declining Promotion to Evade Transfer to an Unattractive Station 
 
A decision was circulated vide Establishment Division O.M. No. 1/21/76-D. II, 
dated the 18th September, 1976 (Annex) that if a senior person declines promotion to suit his 
convenience, he should lose in seniority to the next junior person who is promoted in the 
relevant vacancy, and that he should not be considered for promotion till after his case for 
promotion has been considered again by the Selection Board in a subsequent meeting. The 
competent authority may also consider the grounds on which promotion has been declined 
and, in suitable cases, may take disciplinary action (on grounds of misconduct, that is, refusal 
to obey orders to proceed on transfer to another station) where it is clear that the promotion 
has been declined to evade transfer to an unattractive station, and may impose the penalty of 
withholding of promotion for a specified period. 
 
2. 
It has now been considered that the aforesaid decision is inconsistent with 
the broad provisions of the Civil Servants Act, 1973.  The Establishment Division 
 O.M. No. 1/21/76-D.II, dated 18th September, 1976 is, therefore, withdrawn with immediate 
effect.  All such cases where senior persons decline promotion to suit their convenience shall 
be decided in future on merits of each case in consultation with Establishment Division. 
[Authority:– Estt. Division O.M.No.1/21/76-D.II(R-4), dated 9-5-1982]. 
(ANNEX) 
[Copy of Establishment Div.’s O.M. No. 1/21/76-D.II, dated the 18th September, 1976]. 
 
The question as to how the seniority of a person who is cleared for promotion but 
who declines promotion should be determined when he is subsequently promoted has been 
considered. It has been decided that if a senior person declines promotion to suit his 
convenience, he should lose in seniority to the next junior person who is promoted in the 
relevant vacancy, and that he should not be considered for promotion till after his case for 
promotion has been considered again by the Selection Board in a subsequent meeting. The 
competent authority may also consider the grounds on which promotion has been declined 
and, in suitable cases, may take disciplinary action (on grounds of misconduct that is, refusal 
to obey orders to proceed on transfer to another station) where it is clear that the promotion 
has been declined to evade transfer to an unattractive station, and may impose the penalty of 
withholding of promotion for a specified period. 

Page - 734                             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                               CHAPTER-7                   
 
 
Sl.No.15 
Discontinuation of use of the Term ―Competent Authority‖  
 
The Prime Minister has directed that the words ―competent authority‖ frequently 
used in official notifications and correspondence should be discontinued with immediate 
effect. Use of the term ―competent authority‖ creates ambiguity and uncertainty. The 
authority passing the order should be clearly specified in notification/orders/correspondence 
wherever such a reference is required.  
[Authority:— Cabinet Division‘s Circular No. 36/Cab/2002 dated 26-11-2002] 
 
____________________________ 

CHAPTER 8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONDUCT, EFFICIENCY AND DISCIPLINE 
(735 - 736) 
 

 CHAPTER-8                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                           Page-737 
 
 
Chapter 8 
Conduct, Efficiency & Discipline 
Sl. 
No(s). 
Chapter Contents 
Page  
No(s). 
  
I.   CONDUCT 
 
 
 
1.1 
Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964 .............................
743-753 
 
1.2 
Delegation of Powers to Secretaries to Government  under the 
Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964 ................................
753 
 
1.3 
Delegation of Powers to Secretaries to Government of Pakistan 
– Heads of Departments .................................................................
753 
 
1.4 
Interpretation of the term "Government" as Defined in the 
Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964 ................................
753-754 
 
1.5 
Procedure for the Acceptance and Disposal of Gifts ......................
754-757 
 
2.1 
Bar Against Demanding Dowry and Acceptance of Gifts on 
Occasions of Marriages ................................................................
757-758 
 
2.2 
Bar Against Acceptance of Gratification by Grade 1-3 
Employees on Occasions of Eid etc. from Public ...........................
758 
 
2.3 
Acceptance of Foreign Trips Sponsored by Commercial Firms .....
758-759 
 
2.4 
Acceptance of Foreign Awards by Government Servants ..............
759 
 
2.5 
Holding of Farewell Parties on the Occasion of Transfers of 
Government Servants In their Honour ............................................
759 
 
3.1 
Prohibition to be Chief Guests .....................................................
760 
 
3.2 
Raising of Subscriptions for Functions, etc. ...................................
760 
 
3.3 
Raising of Subscription for Funds – Regulatory Criteria ...............
760-761 
 
4.1 
Grant of Permission for Acquisition of Property (Movable 
and Immovable) by Government Servants ..................................
761-762 
 
4.2 
Revision 
of 
Proforma 
for 
Permission 
Regarding 
Acquisition/Disposal/ Construction of Moveable/ Immovable 
Property ..........................................................................................
762-763 
 
4.3 
Acquisition of Immovable Property by Government Servants 
Posted/Employed In Pakistan Missions Abroad .............................
764 
 
4.4 
Declaration of Assets Held and Acquired by Government 
Servants and Corporation Employees .............................................
765-769 
 
5.1 
Amendments in Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 
1964 and Submission of Declaration of Income and Assets 
Held 
and 
Acquired 
by 
Government 
Servants 
and 
Corporation Employees ................................................................
770 
 
5.2 
Declaration of Assets Held and Acquired by Government 
Servants for the year ending 30th June, 20__ ..................................
771-775 

Page-738                               ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                        CHAPTER-8    
       
 
Sl. 
No(s). 
Chapter Contents 
Page  
No(s). 
 
5.3 
Quarterly Statement Regarding Permissions Granted to the 
Federal Government Officers Under Government Servants 
(Conduct) Rules, 1964 by the Provincial Government to Buy 
and Sell Assets................................................................................
776 
 
6.1 
Private Medical Practice by Government Servants ...................
776 
 
6.2 
Transaction of Insurance Business by Government Servants .........
777 
 
6.3 
Private Work During and After Office Hours ................................
777 
 
6.4 
Future Good Conduct of Pensioners  .............................................
777-778 
 
6.5 
Taking Part in Politics by Pensioners ..................................................
778 
 
7.1 
Employment 
of 
Dependent 
Family 
Members 
of 
a  
 
Government Servant in Foreign Missions in Pakistan ...............
778 
 
7.2 
Engagement in Trade, Business etc. By Spouses of Government 
Servants ..........................................................................................
778-779 
 
7.3 
Instructions under Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964 
Regarding Procedure for Engaging in Private Business, Trade 
and Consultancy Work ...................................................................
779 
 
7.4 
Use of Social Media by Government Servants  
780-781 
 
7.5 
Membership of Private Associations Connected  with Social 
Work ...............................................................................................
782 
 
7.6 
Association with Private Trusts, Foundations, etc. .........................
782 
 
7.7 
Prosecution of Studies by Government Servants in Educational 
Institutions ......................................................................................
782 
 
7.8 
Appearing at an Examination as Private Candidates by 
Government Servants .....................................................................
782-783 
 
8.1 
Bar Against Naming of Institutions, Projects, Roads, Streets 
 
 etc. in the Country after the Names of Government 
 
Servants .........................................................................................
783-784 
 
8.2 
Participation in Foreign Cultural Associations or Organizations ...
784 
 
8.3 
Membership of Foreign Cultural Associations/ Organizations ......
784 
 
9.1 
Membership of British Library ...................................................
784 
 
9.2 
Unauthorized Communication of Official Documents or 
Information .......................................................................................
785 
 
10.1 Premature Leakage of Information to the Press/Media .............
785 
 
10.2 Instructions under Government Servants (Conduct) Rules,1964 
Regarding Procedure for Participating in Electronic, Print and 
Social Media Platforms ..................................................................
786 
 
10.3 Consultation with Principal Information Officer for Projection 
of Government Policies Programmes and Activities ......................
786-787 
 
10.4 Letters to Editor ..............................................................................
787 

 CHAPTER-8                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                           Page-739 
 
 
Sl. 
No(s). 
Chapter Contents 
Page  
No(s). 
 
11.1 Approaches to Ministers, M.N.As. etc. for Purchase or Sale 
of Property ....................................................................................
788 
 
11.2 Extraneous Influence by Government Servants in Respect of 
Service Matters ...............................................................................
788 
 
11.3 Measures to Curb Extraneous Influences by Government 
Servants in Service Matters ............................................................
789 
 
11.4 Steps to Curb Extraneous Influences .............................................
789 
 
11.5 Evidence Before Committee of the National Assembly .................
790 
 
11.6 Clarification of Application of Instructions Regarding Radio 
Broadcasts to Employees of Autonomous Bodies ..........................
790-791 
 
12.1 Taking Part in Politics - Bar against Supporting Student 
Agitations ......................................................................................
791 
 
12.2 Action to be Taken Against Government Servants Found 
Indulging in Politics/Subversive Activities ....................................
791-792 
 
12.3 Bar Against Discussing Politics in Offices, Clubs, Restaurants 
and Public Places............................................................................
792-793 
 
13.1 Supply of Copies of Government's Orders/Instructions to 
the Employees Associations ..........................................................
793-794 
 
13.2 Continuation of Service Association Other Than Those of 
Services Regularly Constituted ......................................................
794 
14 
Functioning of Service Associations .......................................................
794 
 
15.1 Permission to Representatives of Service Associations to 
  
Attend Various Meetings .............................................................
795 
 
15.2 Grant of Interview to the Office Bearers of the Association ..........
795 
 
15.3 Bar Against Public Criticism of Government Action by 
Associations etc. .............................................................................
795 
 
15.4 Demands of Service Associations ..................................................
795-796 
 
16.1 Channel of Communication Between Recognized Service 
  
Associations and Government .....................................................
796 
 
16.2 Approaching Foreign Missions and Aid-Giving Agencies By  
 
Officers to Secure Invitation to Visit a Foreign Country or to 
 
Elicit Offers of Training Facilities .......................................................
797 
 
17.1 Correspondence with Foreign Missions ......................................
797 
 
17.2 Bar Against Security Scholarships and Invitation to Visit 
Abroad ............................................................................................
798 
 
18.1 Fraternisation Between Government Servants and the 
  
Foreign Missions in Pakistan .......................................................
798-799 
 
18.2 Indulging in Critical Remarks Against Ministers ...........................
799 
 
19.1 Government Servants (Marriage with Foreign Nationals) 
  
Rules, 1962 ................................................................................................
800-803 

Page-740                               ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                        CHAPTER-8    
       
 
Sl. 
No(s). 
Chapter Contents 
Page  
No(s). 
 
19.2 Marriage or Promise of Marriage with Foreign National 
(Except Indian) to be Considered `Misconduct' .............................
803 
 
19.3 Observance of Government Servants (Marriage with Foreign 
Nationals) Rules, 1962 and Guidelines ..........................................
803 
 
19.4 Bar Against Making Requests for Ex-Post Facto Approval for 
Marriages with Foreign Nationals ..................................................
804 
 
19.5 Prohibition of Wasteful Expenditure on Marriages ........................
804 
  
II.  EFFICIENCY AND DISCIPLINE 
 
 
20.1 Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules, 2020 .................
805-815 
 
20.2 Disciplinary 
Proceedings 
under 
Government 
Servants 
(Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 1973 against Accused 
Government Servants: Furnishing of Case Material .......................
815-816 
 
20.3 Applicability 
of 
the 
Disciplinary 
Proceedings 
against 
Dismissed, Removed or Compulsorily Retired Civil Servants .......
816 
 
21.1 Procedure for Obtaining Orders of the President or Prime 
Minister in Disciplinary Cases .......................................................
816-817 
 
21.2 Appointment of an Inquiry Officer Under the Government 
Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 1973 ..........................
817-818 
 
22.1 Need of Keeping the Provisions of FR-29 in View While 
Imposing the Penalty Under Rule 4(c) of the Civil Servants 
(Efficiency and Discipline) Rules,2020 ........................................
818 
 
22.2 Disciplinary Procedure to be Followed in Cases Where No 
Inquiry Officer/ Committee is Appointed .......................................
818-819 
 
22.3 Requirement to Issue a Fresh Show Cause Notice if the Penalty 
Imposed 
Under 
Government 
Servants 
(Efficiency 
and 
Discipline) Rules, 1973, or Proposed to be Imposed is Greater 
than that Specified in the Show Cause Notice, or is Proposed to 
be Enhanced by the Appellate Authority ........................................
819-820 
 
23.1 Publication of Notices in the Newspapers ...................................
820-821 
 
23.2 Publication of Charge Sheet or Show Cause Notice in 
Newspaper ......................................................................................
821-822 
 
24.1 Leaving Station by Government Servants under Suspension ....
822 
 
24.2 Bar Against Use of Government Stationery and Service Postage 
Stamps by Accused Government Servants in Disciplinary 
Proceedings ....................................................................................
823 
 
25.1 Filling Up of Suspension Vacancies .............................................
823 
 
25.2 Termination of Services of Temporary Government Servants 
under Suspension ...........................................................................
823-825 
 
25.3 Bar 
Against 
Mentioning 
of 
Unfinalised 
Departmental 
Proceedings in Confidential Reports ..............................................
825-826 
 
26.1 T.A. Admissible to Witnesses and Accused Government 
  
Servant Summoned by an Inquiry Officer ..................................
826 

 CHAPTER-8                           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                           Page-741 
 
 
Sl. 
No(s). 
Chapter Contents 
Page  
No(s). 
 
26.2 Admissibility of TA to Witness in Disciplinary Cases ...................
826-827 
 
26.3 Admissibility of TA to Government Servants under Suspension 
827 
 
26.4 Framing of an Additional Charge During Currency of the  
Disciplinary Proceedings ................................................................
827 
 
27.1 Scope of Departmental Proceedings Under the Efficiency  
 
and Discipline Rules in Cases Referred to the Courts ...............
827-828 
 
27.2 Quick Disposal of Disciplinary Proceedings Pending Against 
Government Servants Who are About to Superannuate .................
829 
 
27.3 Censure, Reprimand and Warning ..................................................
829 
 
28.1 Participation of Government Servants in Drinking Parties .......
830 
 
28.2 Officers' Duty to Watch Conduct of their Subordinates .................
830 
 
28.3 Responsibility of Head of Department for Corruption in 
Department .....................................................................................
830-831 
 
28.4 Loss of Security Passes to be Treated as 'Misconduct' ...................
831-832 
 
28.5 Use 
of 
Intemperate 
and 
Inappropriate 
Language 
in 
Representations and Petitions of Government Servants  ................
832 
 
28.6 Grant of Leave to Government Servants Compulsorily Retired 
from Service under the Government Servants (Efficiency and 
Discipline) Rules ............................................................................
832 
 
28.7 Grant of Arrears of Pay and Allowances to Government 
Servants for Period of Absence from Duty, On Re-Instatement 
as a Result of Court's Decisions .....................................................
833 
 
28.8 Reinstatement of Government Servants on Court Decision and 
Functions of Enquiry Committee....................................................
833-835 
 
28.9 Grant of Arrears of Pay and Allowances to Government 
Servants for Period of Absence from Duty, on Reinstatement as 
a Result of Court’s Decision ...........................................................
836 
 
29.1 Committals to Prison - [CSR 194] ...............................................
836 
 
29.2 Detention of Government Servants Under Public Safety Acts .......
836-837 
 
29.3 Clarification Regarding Detention of Government Servants  
Under Public Safety Act .................................................................
837 
 
29.4 Removal  From  Service as  a  Result  of  Conviction in Court 
of  Law ...........................................................................................
838 
30 
Strictures Passed by Courts Against Government Servants ................
839 
 
31.1 False or Forged Information About Educational Qualifica- 
tions and Age and Pakistan Penal Code ......................................
839-840 
 
31.2 Anti-Corruption Measures – Government Servants to Disclose 
Their Assets/Severe Disciplinary Action For Indulging in 
Corrupt Practices ............................................................................
840 
 
32.1 Responsibility of Head of Department for Corruption 
  
within Area of  his Administrative Jurisdiction..............................
840-841 

Page-742                               ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                        CHAPTER-8    
       
 
Sl. 
No(s). 
Chapter Contents 
Page  
No(s). 
 
32.2 Co-operation with Investigating Officers of the Federal 
Investigating Agency ......................................................................
841 
 
32.3 Instructions 
Regarding 
Investigations 
by 
the 
Federal 
Investigation Agency into Cases of Bribery and Corruption ..........
841-845 
 
33.1 The Federal Investigation Agency, Act 1974 (Act VIII of 
1975) ..............................................................................................
845-850 
 
33.2 Setting up of Anti-Corruption Council at the Centre to Deal 
with Cases of Class I Officers.........................................................
851-852 
 
33.3 Correspondence with the F.I.A .......................................................
852 
34 
National Accountability Ordinance No. XVIII of 1999 .......................
853-893 
 
35.1 Queries About Review Exercise ..................................................
894 
 
35.2 Clarification Regarding Option of Seeking Pre-mature  
Retirement ......................................................................................
894-895 
 
35.3 Implications of Release of a Government Servant under Section  
25 of Ordinance No. XVIII of 1999 for Disciplinary 
Proceedings ....................................................................................
895-896 
36 
Employment/Re-employment of Persons Penalized Under the 
Government Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 1973 and 
the Removal from Service (Special Powers) Ordinance, 2000 .............
896 
 
 
 
———————— 

CHAPTER-8           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                 Page - 743 
 
 
CHAPTER 8 
CONDUCT, EFFICIENCY AND DISCIPLINE 
I.   CONDUCT 
 
1.1 
Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964 
 
In exercise of the powers conferred by paragraph (a) of clause (2) of Article 178 
and clause (1) of Article 179 of the Constitution and of all powers enabling him in that 
behalf, the President is pleased to make the following rules, namely:— 
THE GOVERNMENT SERVANTS (CONDUCT) 
RULES, 1964 
 
1. 
Short title and commencement.— (1) These rules may be called the 
Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964. 
 
(2) They shall come into force at once. 
 
2. 
Extent of application.— These rules apply to every person, whether on duty 
or on leave, within or without Pakistan, serving in a civil capacity in connection with the 
affairs of the **Centre and to the members of an All-Pakistan Service during their 
employment under the Provincial Governments or while on deputation with any other 
Government, agency, institution or authority: 
 
Provided that the Central Government may, by a notification in the official 
Gazette, exempt any class of Government servants from the operation of all or any of these 
rules. 
 
3. 
Definitions.— (1) In these rules, unless there is anything repugnant in the 
subject or context,— 
(a) 
―Government‖ means the **Central Government and in respect of officers of 
an All-Pakistan Service serving in a Province, the Provincial Government; 
(b) 
―Government servant‖ means a person to whom these rules apply; and 
(c) 
―member of a Government servant‘s family‖ includes- 
 (i) 
his wife, child or step-child, whether residing with the Government 
servant or not; and 
                         
 Constitution, 1962. Ref. Chapter, 1, Vol. I, Article 241 of the Constitution, 1973 provides that all rules and 
orders in force before the commencing day shall, so far as consistent with the provisions of the constitution, 
continue in force and may be amended from time to time by the Federal Government. Hence section 25 (2) of 
Civil Servants Act, 1973. 
 Federal 

Page - 744            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                            CHAPTER-8       
        
 
(ii) 
any other relative of the Government servant or his wife, when residing 
with and wholly dependent upon the Government servant, but does not 
include a wife legally separated from the Government servant, or a 
child or step-child who is no longer in any way dependent upon him, or 
of whose custody the Government servant has been deprived by law. 
 
(2) 
Reference to a wife in clause (c) of sub-rule (1) shall be construed as 
references to a husband where the Government servant is a woman. 
 
4. 
Repeal of previous Conduct Rules.—The Government Servants Conduct 
Rules made under section 96-B of the Government of India Act, 1919, and the Secretary of 
State‘s Services (Conduct) Rules, 1942, made under sections 247(1), 250 and 269 of the 
Government of India Act, 1935, in so far as they applied to the persons to whom these rules 
apply, are hereby repealed, but such repeal shall not affect anything duly done or suffered 
under those rules. 
 
[5. Gifts.—(1) Save as otherwise provided in this rule, no Government servant 
shall, except with the previous sanction of the Government, accept, or permit any member of 
his family to accept, from any person any gift the receipt of which will place him under any 
form of official obligation to the donor. If, however, due to very exceptional reasons, a gift 
cannot be refused, the same may, under intimation to the Cabinet Division, be kept for 
official use in the Department or Organisation in which he is working]. 
 
(2) 
If any question arises whether receipt of a gift places a Government servant 
under any form of official obligation to the donor, the decision of the Government thereon 
shall be final. 
 
(3) 
If any gift is offered by the head or representative of a foreign State, the 
Government servant concerned should attempt to avoid acceptance of such a gift, if he can 
do so without giving offence. If, however, he cannot do so, he shall accept the gift and shall 
report its receipt to the Cabinet Division for orders as to its disposal. 
 
 (4) Government servants are prohibited from receiving gift of any kind for their 
person or for members of their families from diplomats, consular and other foreign 
Government representatives or their employees who are stationed in Pakistan.  
If, however, due to very exceptional reasons, a gift cannot be refused, it should invariably be 
deposited in the ‗Toshakhana‘. 
 
(5)  Government servants, except those belonging to BPS 1 to 4, are prohibited 
from accepting cash awards offered by the visiting foreign dignitaries. In case, however, it 
becomes impossible to refuse without causing offence to the visiting dignitary, the amount 
may be accepted and immediately deposited in the Treasury under the proper head of 
account. 
 
(6) 
The responsibility for reporting the receipt of a gift shall devolve on the 
individual recipient. All gifts received by a Government servant, irrespective of their prices, 
                         
 Subs vide Estt. Div.‘s Notification No.807(I)/79, dated 12-9-1979. 
Note.- Rule 5 may be read in conjunctions with the instructions contained in the Cabinet Division O.M. No. 
8/5/2017-TK, dated 18-12-2018 at Sl.No. 1.5. 

CHAPTER-8           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                 Page - 745 
 
 
must be reported to the ‗Toshakhana‘ in the Cabinet Division. However, the responsibility 
for reporting to the Cabinet Division receipt of gifts, including the names of recipients, from 
foreign dignitaries or delegations who come to Pakistan or when Pakistani dignitaries or 
delegations go abroad, shall lie with the Chief of protocol or his representative in the former 
case, and with the Ambassador concerned in the latter case. In the case of foreign delegat-
ions or visiting dignitaries with whom the Chief of Protocol is not associated, the Ministry 
sponsoring the visit shall be responsible to supply the details of gifts, if received, and the list 
of recipients to the Cabinet Division and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 
 
(7) The value of gifts shall be assessed by the Cabinet Division and the monetary 
limits up to which and the condition subject to which, the gifts may be allowed to be retained 
by the recipient shall be as follows:- 
(a) 
gifts valued upto Rs. 1,000 may be allowed to be retained by the recipient; 
(b) 
gifts valued between Rs. 1,000 and 5,000 may be allowed to be retained by a 
recipient on his paying 25% of the value of the gift in excess of Rs. 1,000; 
and  
(c) 
gifts of value exceeding Rs. 5,000 may be allowed to be retained by a 
recipient on his paying 25% of so much of the value as exceeds Rs. 1,000 but 
does not exceed Rs. 5,000 and 15% of so much of the value as exceeds Rs. 
5,000]. 
 
6. 
Acceptance of foreign awards.— No Government servant shall, except 
with the approval of the President, accept a foreign award, title or decoration. 
 
Explanation.— For the purposes of this rule, the expression ―approval of the 
President‖ means prior approval in ordinary cases and ex-post-facto approval in special 
cases where sufficient time is not available for obtaining prior approval. 
 
7. 
Public demonstrations in honour of Government Servants.— (1) No 
Government servant shall encourage meetings to be held in his honour or presentation of 
address of which the main purpose is to praise him. 
 
(2)  Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule(1)— 
(a) 
a Government servant may, with the previous permission of his next 
higher officer, take part in the raising of funds to be expended for any 
public or charitable purpose; 
(b) 
a Government servant may take part, with the previous sanction of the 
Government, in the raising of funds to be expended for any public or 
charitable object connected with the name of any other Government 
servant or a person who has recently quitted the service of the 
Government; 
(c) 
the Head of a Pakistan Mission abroad, while so posted, may attend a 
public meeting or entertainment held in his honour. 
                         
Values given in Rule 5(7) may be read in conjunctions with the Cabinet Division‘s O.M No. 8/5/2017-TK 
 dated 18-12-2018 at Sl.No. 1.5. 

Page - 746            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                            CHAPTER-8       
        
 
 
(3) 
When a Government servant takes part in the raising of funds in accordance 
with the provisions of clauses (a) and (b) of sub-rule (2), he shall be required to keep regular 
accounts and submit them to his next higher officer for scrutiny. 
 
(4) 
Clauses (a) and (b) of sub-rule (2) shall not apply to officers of the Police 
Service of Pakistan and the Pakistan Taxation Service. 
 
8. 
Gift to Medical Officers.— Subject to the departmental rules governing the 
question, a Medical Officer may accept any gift of moderate value offered in good faith by 
any person or body of persons in recognition of his professional services. 
 
9. 
Subscriptions.— Subject to rule 7, no Government servant shall, except 
with the previous sanction of the Government, ask for or accept or in any way participate in 
the raising of any subscription or other pecuniary assistance in pursuance of any object 
whatsoever. 
 
10. 
Lending and Borrowing.— (1) No Government servant shall lend money 
to, or borrow money from, or place himself under any pecuniary obligation to, any person 
within the local limits of his authority or any person with whom he has any official dealings: 
 
Provided that the above rule shall not apply to dealings in the ordinary course of 
business with a joint stock company, bank or a firm of standing. 
 
(2) 
When a government servant is appointed or transferred to a post of such a 
nature that a person from whom he has borrowed money or to whom he has other wise 
placed himself under a pecuniary obligation will be subject to his official authority, or will 
reside, possess immovable property, or carry on business within the local limits of such 
authority, he shall forthwith declare the circumstances to the Government through the usual 
channel. 
 
(3) 
Non-gazetted Government servants shall make the declaration referred to in 
sub-rule (2) to the head of their office. 
 
(4) 
This rule, in so far as it may be construed to relate to loans given to or taken 
from co-operative societies registered under the Cooperative Societies Act, 1912 (II of 
1912), or under any law for the time being in force relating to the registration of Cooperative 
Societies, by the Government servants, shall be subject to any general or special restrictions 
or relaxations made or permitted by the Government. 
 
[11. Omitted 
 
*11-A 
Omitted] 
 
 
12. 
Declaration of property.— (1) Every Government servant shall, at the 
time of entering Government service, make a declaration to the Government, through the 
usual channel, of all immovable and movable properties including shares, certificates, 
securities, insurance policies and jewellery having a total value of **[Rs.50,000 (fifty 
                         
 Omitted vide Estt. Div.‘s Notification SRO 984(I)/2004, dated 15th December, 2004.  
**Subs.vide Estt.Div.‘s SRO No. 846(1)/85, dated 5.9.1985 for the words Rs. 10,000/- (Ten thousand). 

CHAPTER-8           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                 Page - 747 
 
 
thousand rupees)] or more belonging to or held by him or a member of his family and 
such declaration shall,— 
(a) 
state the district within which the property is situated. 
(b) 
show separately individual items of jewellery exceeding [Rs. 50,000  
(fifty thousand rupees)] in value, and  
(c) 
give such further information as the Government may, by general or 
special order, require. 
 
*(2) Every Government Servant shall submit to the Government, through the 
usual channel an annual declaration of income, assets and expenses for the financial year, 
ending on 30th June, showing any increase or decrease of property as shown in the 
declaration under sub-rule(1) or the last annual return, as the case may be. 
 
(3) Declaration of Assets Proforma shall be opened in the concerned section 
each year and entered into the relevant database in the month of December showing any 
increase or decrease of property as shown in the declaration under sub-rule or, as the case 
may be, the last annual return. 
 
13. 
Disclosure of assets, immovable, movable and liquid.— A Government 
servant shall, as and when he is so required by Government by a general or special order, 
furnish information as to his assets disclosing liquid assets and all other properties, 
immovable and movable, including shares, certificates, insurance policies, jewellery 
*[and expenses during any period specified by such order in the form specified therein]. 
 
13-A. Assets to be made public.—The assets of all those who are paid from 
the government exchequer shall be made public. 
 
14. 
Speculation and investment.— (1) No Government servant shall 
speculate in investments. For the purpose of this sub-rule, the habitual purchase and sale 
of securities of notoriously fluctuating value shall be deemed to be speculation in 
investments. 
 
(2) 
No Government servant shall make, or permit any member of his family to 
make, any investment likely to embarrass or influence him in the discharge of his official 
duties. 
 
(3) 
No Government servant shall make any investment the value of which is 
likely to be affected by some event of which information is available to him as a 
Government servant and is not equally available to the general public. 
 
(4) 
 If any question arises whether a security or an investment is of the nature 
referred to in any of the foregoing sub-rules, the decision of the Government thereon shall 
be final. 
                         
Subs. vide Estt. Div.‘s SRO No. 846 (1)/85, dated 5.9.1985 for the words Rs. 10,000/- (Ten thousand). 
 Added vide Estt. Division‘s Notification No. SRO.225(1)/92, dated 31-03-1992. 
 Inserted vide Estt. Div.‘s Notification No. S.R.O 771(I)/2012 dated 04-06-2012.  

Page - 748            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                            CHAPTER-8       
        
 
 
15. 
Promotion and Management of companies, etc.— No Government 
servant shall, except with the previous sanction of the Government, take part in the 
promotion, registration or management of any bank or company: 
 
Provided that a Government servant may, subject to the provisions of any general 
or special order of the Government, take part in the promotion, registration or management 
of a Co-operative Society registered under the Cooperative Societies Act, 1912 (II of 1912), 
or under any similar law. 
 
16. 
Private trade, employment or work.— (1) No Government servant shall, 
except with the previous sanction of the Government, engage in any trade or undertake any 
employment or work, other than his official duties: 
 
Provided that he may, without such sanction, undertake honorary work of a 
religious, social or charitable nature or occasional work of a literary artistic-character, 
subject to the conditions that his official duties do not thereby suffer and that the occupation 
or undertaking does not conflict or is not inconsistent with his position or obligations as a 
Government servant but he shall not undertake or shall discontinue such work if so directed 
by the Government. A Government servant who has any doubt about the propriety of 
undertaking any particular work should refer the matter for the orders of the Government: 
 
Provided further that non-gazetted Government servant may, without such sanction, 
undertake a small enterprise which absorbs family labour and where he does so shall file 
details of the enterprise alongwith the declaration of assets. 
 
(2)  Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1), no Government servant 
shall associate himself with any private trust, foundation or similar other institution which is 
not sponsored by the Government. 
 
(3) 
 This rule does not apply to sports activities and membership of recreation 
clubs. 
 
16-A.  Subletting of residential accommodation allotted by Government.— No 
Government servant shall, except with the prior permission of the Head of the Department, 
sublet residential accommodation let to him by Government. 
 
16-B. Government Servant not to live beyond his means, etc.— No government 
servant shall live beyond his means or indulge in ostentation on occasions of marriage or 
other ceremonies. 
 
17.  Insolvency and habitual indebtedness.— A Government servant shall 
avoid habitual indebtedness. If a government servant is adjudged or declared insolvent or if 
the whole of that portion of his salary which is liable to attachment is frequently attached for 
debt, has been continuously so attached for a period of two years, or is attached for a sum 
which, in ordinary circumstances, he cannot repay within a period of two years, he shall be 
presumed to have contravened this rule unless he proves that the insolvency or indebtedness 
is the result of circumstances which, with the exercise of ordinary diligence, he could not 

CHAPTER-8           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                 Page - 749 
 
 
have foreseen or over which he had no control and has not proceeded from extravagant or 
dissipated habits. A government servant who applies to be or is adjudged or declared 
insolvent shall forthwith report his insolvency to the Head of the Office or Department or to 
the Secretary of the Ministry, as the case may be, in which he is employed. 
 
17-A. Intimation of involvement and conviction in a criminal case.— If a 
Government servant is involved as an accused in a criminal case, he shall bring the fact of 
such involvement or conviction, as the case may be, to the notice of the head of the Office or 
Department immediately or, if he is arrested and released on bail, soon after such release. 
 
18. 
Unauthorized communication of official documents or information.— 
No Government servant shall, except in accordance with any special or general order of the 
Government, communicate directly or indirectly any official document or information to a 
Government servant unauthorized to receive it, or to a non-official person, or to the press. 
 
19. 
Approach to members of the Assemblies, etc.— No Government  servant  
shall,  directly  or  indirectly, approach any Member of the National Assembly or a 
Provincial Assembly or any other non-official person to intervene on his behalf in any 
matter. 
 
20. 
Management etc. of newspapers or periodicals.— No Government 
servant shall, except with the previous sanction of the Government, own wholly or in part, or 
conduct or participate in the editing or management of, any newspaper or other periodical 
publication. 
 
21. Radio broadcasts or television programmes and communications to the 
press.— No Government servant shall, except with the previous sanction of the Government 
or any other authority empowered by it in this behalf, or in the bonafide discharge of his 
duties, participate in a radio broadcast or television programme or contribute any article or 
write any letter, either anonymously or in his own name or in the name of any other person 
to any newspaper or periodical: 
 
Provided that such sanction shall generally be granted if such broadcast or 
television programme or such contribution or letter is not, or may not be considered likely to 
jeopardize the integrity of the Government servant, the security of Pakistan or friendly 
relations with foreign States, or to offend public order, decency or morality, or to amount to 
contempt of court, defamation or incitement to an offence: 
 
Provided further that no such sanction shall be required if such broadcast or 
television programme or such contribution or letter is of a purely literary, artistic or scientific 
character. 
 
22. 
Publication of information and public speeches capable of 
embarrassing the government.— No Government servant shall, in any document 
                         
 Added vide Estt. Div.‘s Notification No. S.R.O.757(I)/78, dated 14-6-1978. 

Page - 750            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                            CHAPTER-8       
        
 
published, or in any communication made to the press, over his own name, or in any 
public utterance or television programme or in any radio broadcast delivered by him, 
make any statement of fact or opinion which is capable of embarrassing the Government: 
 
Provided that technical staff (both gazetted and non-gazetted) may publish research 
papers on technical subjects, if such papers do not express views on political issues or on 
Government policy and do not include any information of a classified nature. 
 
22-A. 
Where a Government Servant submits the draft of a literary, artistic or 
scientific article or book for obtaining previous sanction for its publication, he shall be 
informed within three months of his doing so whether he has or has not such sanction and, if 
no communication is issued to him within that period, he shall be entitled to presume that the 
sanction asked for has been granted. 
 
23. 
Evidence before committees.— (1) No Government servant shall give 
evidence before a public committee except with the previous sanction of the Government. 
 
(2) 
No Government servant giving such evidence shall criticize the policy or 
decisions of the Central or a Provincial Government. 
 
(3) 
This rule shall not apply to evidence given before statutory committees 
which have power to compel attendance and the giving of answers, not to evidence given in 
judicial inquiries. 
 
24. 
Taking part in politics and elections.— (1) No Government servant shall 
take part in subscribe in aid of or assist in any way, any political movement in Pakistan or 
relating to the affairs of Pakistan. 
 
(2)  No Government servant shall permit any person dependent on him for 
maintenance or under his care or control to take part in or in any way assist, any movement 
or activity which is, or tends directly or indirectly to be, subversive of Government as by law 
established in Pakistan. 
 
(3)  No Government servant shall canvass or otherwise interfere or use his 
influence in connection with or take part in any election to a legislative body, whether in 
Pakistan or elsewhere: 
 
Provided that a Government servant who is qualified to vote at such election may 
exercise his right to vote: but if he does so, he shall give no indication of the manner in 
which he propose to vote or has voted. 
 
***(4) No Government servant shall allow any member of his family dependent on 
him to indulge in any political activity, including forming a political association and being its 
member, or to act in a manner in which he himself is not permitted by sub-rule (3)  
to act. 
                         
 Added vide Estt. Div.‘s Notification No.7/2/79-D IV, dated 10-7-1980. 
 Federal. 
*** Subs. vide Estt. Div.‘s Notification No. S.R.O.993(I)/76, dated 30-9-1976. 

CHAPTER-8           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                 Page - 751 
 
 
 
(5) 
 A government servant who issues an address to electors or in any other 
manner publicly announces himself or allows himself to be publicly announced as a 
candidate or prospective candidate for election to a legislative body shall be deemed for the 
purpose of sub-rule (3) to take part in an election to such body. 
 
(6)  The provisions of sub-rules (3) and (5) shall, so far as may be, apply to 
elections to local authorities or bodies, save in respect of Government servants required or 
permitted by or under any law, or order of the Government, for the time being in force, to be 
candidates at such elections. 
 
(7) 
 If any question arises whether any movement or activity falls with the scope 
of this rule, the decision of the Government thereon shall be final. 
 
25. 
Propagation of sectarian creeds etc.— No Government servant shall 
propagate such sectarian creeds or take part in such sectarian controversies or indulge in 
such sectarian partiality and favouritism as are likely to affect his integrity in the discharge of 
his  duties  or to embarrass the administration or create feelings of discontent or displeasure 
amongst the Government servants in particular and amongst the people in general. 
 
25-A. Government servant not to express views, against ideology of 
Pakistan.— No Government servant shall express views detrimental to the ideology or 
integrity of Pakistan. 
 
[25-B. Government servant not to take part in or assist, any public 
demonstration against Government decisions, etc.— No Government servant shall take 
part in, or in any manner assist, any public demonstration directed against a government 
decision or policy or permit any member of his family dependent on him to do so]. 
 
26. Nepotism, favouritism and victimization, etc.— No Government servant 
shall indulge in provincialism, parochialism, favouritism, victimization and willful abuse of 
office. 
 
27. 
Vindication by Government servants of their public acts or character.— 
A Government servant may not, without the previous sanction of the Government, have 
recourse to any court or to the press for the vindication of his public acts or character from 
defamatory attacks. In granting sanction, the Government will ordinarily bear the cost of the 
proceedings and in other cases leave the Government servant to institute them at his own 
expense. In the latter case, if he obtains a decision in his favour, the Government may 
reimburse him to the extent of the whole or any part of the cost. 
 
Nothing in this rule limits or otherwise affects the right of a Government servant to 
vindicate his private acts or character. 
 
28. Membership of service associations.— No Government servant shall be a 
member, representative or officer of any association  representing  or  purporting to 
                         
 Added vide Estt. Div.‘s Notification No. S.R.O. 432(1)/80, dated 27-4-1980. 
 Added vide Estt. Div.‘s Notification No. S.R.O. 837(1)/83 dated 22-8-1983. 

Page - 752            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                            CHAPTER-8       
        
 
represent, Government servants or any class or Government servants, unless such 
association satisfies the following conditions, namely:— 
(a) 
Membership of the association and its office bearers shall be confined to a 
distinct class of Government servants and shall be open to all Government 
servants of that class. 
(b) 
The association shall not be in any way connected with, or affiliated to any 
association which does not, or any federation of associations which do not 
satisfy condition (a). 
(c) 
The association shall not be in any way connected with any political party 
or organization, or engage in any political activity. 
(d) 
The association shall not — 
 (i) 
issue or maintain any periodical publication except in accordance 
with any general or special order of the Government; 
 (ii) except with the previous sanction of the Government, published any 
representation on behalf of its members, whether in the press or 
otherwise. 
(e) 
The association shall not, in respect of any election to a legislative body, 
or to a local authority or body, whether in Pakistan or elsewhere— 
 (i) 
pay or contribute towards, any expenses incurred in connection with 
his candidature by a candidate for such election; 
 (ii) by any means support the candidature of any person for such 
election; or 
 (iii) undertake or assist in the registration of electors, or the selection of a 
candidate for such election. 
 
(f) 
The association shall not— 
 (i) 
maintain, or contribute towards the maintenance of, any member of a 
legislative body, or of any member of local authority or body, 
whether in Pakistan or elsewhere; 
 (ii) pay, or contribute towards, the expenses of any trade union which 
has constituted a fund under section 16 of the Trade Union Act, 
1926 (XVI of 1926). 
 
[28-A. Membership of non-political associations.— No Government servant 
shall accept membership of any non-political association or organization whose aims and 
objects, nature of activities and membership are not publicly known]. 
 
29. 
Use of political or other influence.— No Government servant shall bring 
or attempt to bring political or other outside influence, directly or indirectly, to bear on the 
Government or any Government servant in support of any claim arising in connection with his 
                         
Added vide Estt. Div.‘s  Notification S.R.O. No. 1809(K), dated 8-9-1969. 

CHAPTER-8           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                 Page - 753 
 
 
employment as such. 
 
30. 
 Approaching foreign Missions and aid-giving agencies. —
 
No Government 
servant shall approach, directly or indirectly a foreign mission in Pakistan or any foreign 
aid-giving agency to secure for himself invitations to visit a foreign country or to elicit 
offers of training facilities abroad. 
 
31. 
Delegation of power.— The Government may, by general or special 
order, delegate to any officer or authority subordinate to it all  or  any  of its powers under 
these rules and may, by  such  order, prescribe the channel through which reports shall be 
made to the Government and the officers receipt by whom of such reports shall be 
regarded as receipt of the reports by the Government within the meaning of these rules. 
 
32. 
Rules not to be in derogation of any law, etc.— Nothing in these rules 
shall derogate from the provisions of any law, or of any order of any competent authority, 
for the time being in force, relating to the conduct of Government servants. 
[Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s Notification No. S.R.O.405(K)/64, dated 1-5-1964]. 
1.2 
Delegation of Powers to Secretaries to  
Government under the Government  
Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964 
 
In exercise of the powers conferred by rule 31 of the Government Servants 
(Conduct) Rules, 1964, the Central Government is pleased to delegate to the Secretaries 
to the Government of Pakistan the powers of the *Central Government under rules 23 and 27 of 
the said Rules, in respect of the officers and staff working under their administrative control. 
[Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s Notification No.3/10/65-DII, dated 19-7-1965]. 
1.3 
Delegation of Powers to Secretaries to Government 
of Pakistan – Heads of Departments 
 
The *Central Government has been pleased to delegate to the Secretaries to the 
Government of Pakistan the powers of the *Central Government under rule 21 of the 
Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964, in relation to the Heads of Departments and 
the government servants under their administrative control, and to the Heads of 
Departments in respect of the officers and staff working under them. 
[Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.3/10/65-D.II, dated 27-8-1966]. 
1.4 
Interpretation of the term ―Government‖ as Defined 
in the Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964 
 
The term ―Government‖ has been defined in rule 3 (a) of the Government 
Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964 as the ―*Central Government‖ and in respect of officers 
                         
Federal. 

Page - 754            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                            CHAPTER-8       
        
 
of an All-Pakistan Service serving in a Province, the Provincial Government. A question 
has arisen as to whether the term ―Central Government‖ for the purpose of these Rules 
means the *Central Government in the Establishment Division or the *Central Govern-
ment in each administrative Ministry/Division. 
 
2. 
The matter has been considered in consultation with the Law Division and 
it has been held that the term ―Government‖ appearing in the Government Servants 
(Conduct) Rules, 1964 means the *Central Government in any Ministry/Division. This 
means that ordinarily an officer in each administrative Ministry/Division is to be granted 
permission under any rule of the Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964 from that 
Ministry/ Division. 
 
3.  
Ministries/Divisions are therefore advised:- 
(a) 
to dispose of individual cases under the Government Servants (Conduct) 
Rules, 1964 in the light of the above interpretation instead of referring 
such cases to the Estt. Division. 
(b) 
to consider internal delegation of powers below the rank of Secretaries/ 
Acting Secretaries so that cases may be decided at appropriate level and all 
cases are not referred to the Secretary of a Ministry/ Division. 
 
4. 
Cases involving interpretation of the Conduct Rules will, however, 
continue to be referred to the Establishment Division for advice. 
 
5.  
Cases of officers belonging to an All-Pakistan Service who are serving, for 
the time being, in a province, should be decided by the Chief Secretary of the Province 
concerned. Provincial Governments may also like to consider further delegation of 
powers so that cases can be decided at appropriate level and every case is not referred to 
the Chief Secretary. 
 
6.  
This supersedes all previous orders on the subject. 
[Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No.26/1/69-D-IV, dated 17-12-1969]. 
 
1.5 
Procedure for the Acceptance and  
Disposal of Gifts 
In supersession of Cabinet Division‘s O.M No. 9/8/2004-TK, dated 13th 
October,2017 and all other instructions issued on the subject from time to time and to 
state that the Government of Pakistan has made the following procedure for acceptance 
and disposal of gifts received by Government/Public functionaries.  
(1) 
The responsibility rest with the individual recipient to report receipt of the 
gift(s) to Cabinet Division. All gifts received by the Government/Public 
functionaries irrespective of their prices, must be reported and deposited 
                         
Federal. 

CHAPTER-8           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                 Page - 755 
 
 
immediately in Toshakhana of the Cabinet Division, Government of 
Pakistan. If it is found, on checking, that an individual has not reported 
the receipt of a gift, appropriate action will be taken against him under the 
relevant rules.  
(2) 
If the Chief of Protocol, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, or his representative 
has been attached to a visiting dignitary or a foreign delegation, it shall be 
his responsibility to supply the list of the gifts received, together with the 
names of the recipients, to the Cabinet Division. In the case of other 
delegations or visiting dignitaries with whom the Chief of Protocol or his 
representative is not associated, the Ministry sponsoring the visit shall be 
responsible to supply the details of gifts received and the list of recipients 
to the Cabinet Division. In the case of outgoing delegations or visits 
abroad of our dignitaries, it shall be the responsibility of the Ambassador 
of Pakistan and/or Head of the Pakistan mission in the country concerned 
to report the receipt of the gifts, together / with the name of the recipients, 
to the Cabinet Division through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 
(3) 
Government/Public functionaries, except those in BPS 1 to BPS 4 are 
prohibited from receiving cash awards offered by the visiting foreign 
dignitaries. Such gifts may be politely refused. In case, however it 
becomes impossible to refuse without causing offence to the visiting 
dignitary, the amount shall be immediately deposited in the Government 
treasury and copy of Treasury Challan shall be provided to the 
Toshakhana Incharge, Cabinet Division. 
(4) 
Government/Public functionaries, except the President and the Head of 
the Government, are prohibited from receiving gifts of any kind for their 
person or for members of their families from diplomats, consular and 
other foreign government representatives who are stationed in Pakistan or 
from any public organization or private individual and firm within the 
country. However, if due to very exceptional reasons the gift cannot be 
declined, it shall invariably be deposited in the Toshakhana. These 
instructions do not apply to gifts and donations made to institutions. 
(5) 
(i) Cabinet Division will get the value of the gifts assessed from 
Government Sector experts in FBR. Cabinet Division will  also get 
the value of gifts assessed by the private appraisers borne on its 
approved panel. 
 
(ii) If the difference in value of gifts assessed by two categories of 
appraisers is less than 25% the high value will be accepted. 
However, if the difference in value is 25% or more, a Committee to 
be constituted by the Cabinet Secretary shall decide the final value. 

Page - 756            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                            CHAPTER-8       
        
 
 
(iii) Private Appraisers borne on the approved panel of the Cabinet 
Division will be paid 2% of the evaluation cost of each gift or 
Rs.2000/-, whichever is less. 
(6) 
The monetary limits upto which the gifts can be retained by the 
 recipients are as follows:— 
 (i)  
Gifts upto a value of Rs. 30,000/-(Rupees thirty thousand 
only) may be retained free of cost by the recipient. 
 (ii) 
Gifts valued above Rs.30,000/- may be allowed to be retained by 
the recipient on payment of 50% of the value exceeding the basic 
exemption of Rs.30,000/-. This exemption shall however not be 
available in case of antiques and gifts of intrinsic historical value. 
All such gifts shall be properly catalogued and displayed at the 
prominent buildings owned by the Government. Different gift 
articles given by a single dignitary to a functionary at one occasion 
will be treated as single gift for the purpose of valuation. 
 
(7) 
The recipient should collect the gifts after payment of retention price 
within four months failing which it will become the property of the 
Toshakhana and will be disposed of as per Toshakhana Rules. The Head 
of Account of Toshakhana in which the amounts are to be deposited is 
―1300000- Others (NES) Misc. Receipt of Darbar Presents (Central)‖. 
 
(8) 
Gifts deposited in the Toshakhana which are fit for display, shall be 
properly 
catalogued 
and 
then 
displayed 
in 
the 
prominent 
buildings/institutions owned by Government or in the official residences 
of the Head of the State or the Head of the Government. Such articles 
shall be properly entered in the Toshakhana register and in the stock 
registers of the respective offices/institutions. 
 
(9) 
An annual physical verification shall be carried out in respect of such 
articles by an authorized officer of the Cabinet Division in the first quarter 
of each calendar year. 
 
(10) Gifts which are not fit to be retained or displayed shall be disposed of by 
periodical sales to be arranged by the Cabinet Division, Government of 
Pakistan. These sales shall be held once or twice a year. The list of gifts to 
be sold shall be circulated to all Federal Government officers and officers 
of the Armed Forces. The articles not purchased in two consecutive 
auctions by the Government servants should be disposed of to the public 
through sealed bids. 
 

CHAPTER-8           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                 Page - 757 
 
 
 
(11) Antique items and vehicles shall not be allowed to be purchased by the 
recipients. Antiques shall be placed in the museums or displayed in 
official building owned by the Government. Vehicles shall be given to the 
Central Pool of Cars of the Cabinet Division. 
 
(12) Gifts, other than those in the nature of antiques or of intrinsic historical 
value, given to but not retained by the President, the Head of the 
Government and the Governors, will be sold in accordance with sub-para 
(10) above. The gifts in the nature of antiques or of intrinsic historical 
value shall be put on display in accordance with sub-para (8) above. 
 
(13) The procedure shall apply to the President/Head of the Government and 
their family members, Chairman Senate, Speaker National Assembly, 
Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, Governors of the Provinces, 
Members of the Federal Cabinet, Attorney General for Pakistan, Ministers 
of State, Deputy Chairman Senate, Deputy Speaker National Assembly, 
Dignitaries holding ministerial status, Members of Provincial Cabinets, 
Judges of Supreme Court, Chief Justice/Judges of the High Courts, 
Parliamentarians and other elected representatives, all Government 
servants (Civil and Military) as well as employees of the Government 
controlled corporations, autonomous and semi-autonomous bodies and 
their spouse/dependents, members of the Provincial Governments, other 
members of public visiting abroad as members of official delegation. 
[Authority.— Cabinet Division‘s O.M No. 8/5/2017-TK dated 18-12-2018.] 
2.1 
Bar Against Demanding Dowry and Acceptance  
of Gifts on Occasions of Marriages 
 
Attention is invited to rule 5(1) of the Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 
1964, according to which no government servant shall, except with the previous sanction 
of the government, accept or permit any member of his family to accept from any person 
any gift the receipt of which may place him under any form of official obligation to the 
donor. It has been found that this rule is not being observed by government servants and a 
number of cases have recently come to notice in which government servants have 
accepted, particularly on occasions of marriage, expensive gifts from persons with whom 
they have or are likely to have official dealings. It has also been observed that government 
officials demand expensive dowries at the time of marriage and even display such dowries 
and gifts before large gatherings.  The Committee on the Eradication of Social Evils has 
deplored the practice of demanding and displaying dowries and gifts on occasions of 
marriage as it encourages lavish expenditure and ostentatious living. 
 
2. 
In view of the increasing tendency to demand and display dowries and to 
accept expensive gifts, government have decided that rule 5 (1) of the Government 
Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964 should be enforced more rigorously and government 
servants should be directed to avoid lavish expenditure on marriage and other ceremonies 

Page - 758            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                            CHAPTER-8       
        
 
and to desist from demanding or displaying dowries or accepting gifts from persons other 
than those who are closely related to them. 
[Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No. 3/8/67-D.II, dated 27-6-1967]. 
2.2 
Bar Against Acceptance of Gratification  
by Grade 1-3 Employees on Occasions  
of Eid etc. from Public 
 
Allegations have come to the notice of government that on occasions of Eid and 
other national festivals, Grade 1-4 employees of certain government departments like the 
Post Offices, Telegraphs, Income Tax, Customs Departments etc., pester people for 
money and other gratifications. Government view such malpractices with extreme 
displeasure and wish to re-emphasize the necessity of stopping forthwith such practices, 
wherever they exist and in whatever form or shape. 
 
2.  
In this connection, attention of the Ministries/Divisions is invited to clause (1) 
of rule 5 of the Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964 which provides, inter alia, that a 
government servant shall not, except with the previous sanction of the government, accept, or 
permit any member of his family to accept, from any person any gift the receipt of which will 
place him under any form of official obligation to the donor. [If, however, due to very 
exceptional reasons, a gift cannot be refused, the same may, under intimation to the Cabinet 
Division, be kept for official use in the department or organization in which he is working]. 
 
3. 
It is requested that all the Ministries/Divisions may kindly bring the above 
instructions home to all the BS-1-4 employees under their control including those employed in 
the Departments, etc., under them, and take effective steps to eradicate such evil practices. 
[Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No. 4/11/62-D.II, dated 14-4-1962]. 
2.3 
Acceptance of Foreign Trips Sponsored  
by Commercial Firms 
 
It has come to the notice of the government that government servants accept 
offers of foreign trips through the generosity of parties who have commercial dealings 
with government departments or autonomous bodies. Besides being unbecoming of a 
government servant, acceptance of such offers tends to place him under official obligation 
to the party concerned which is not conducive to good administration. It has, therefore, 
been decided that government servants should attempt to avoid acceptance of offers of 
such trips. If in any case it is not considered desirable to refuse such an offer in public 
                         
 BPS. 
Telephone & Telegraph Department (T&T Deptt.) converted into Pakistan Telecommunication Corporation 
and later privatized as Pakistan Telecommunication Company Ltd. (PTCL). However, National 
Telecommunication Corporation caters to the telecommunication needs of the government. The posts of 
Telephone Operators continue to exist in government organizations. 
 Amended according to rule 5(1) of the Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964. 

CHAPTER-8           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                 Page - 759 
 
 
interest prior permission of the Establishment Division and the Ministry of Finance 
should invariably be obtained for its acceptance. 
[Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No 3/8/66-D.II, dated 13-8-1966]. 
 
 2.4 Acceptance of Foreign Awards by Government Servants 
 
It is noted with regret that contrary to the laid down instructions, there have been 
several instances where government servants have accepted title, honour or decoration 
from foreign states. Invariably the excuse for having accepted awards by government 
servants in ignorance of the rules. 
 
2. 
The competent authority has taken serious notice of this tendency and has 
been pleased to direct that all Ministries/ Divisions/Departments may be asked to 
disseminate the rule position to government servants for strict compliance. The 
Ministries/Divisions are requested to please bring the rule position as defined in Section 6 
of the Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964 and Article 259 (1) of the 
Constitution of Pakistan, to the notice of all employees working under them and also to 
the employees of autonomous statutory bodies under their administrative control. 
[Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No. 6/10/88-D-3, dated 3-10-1988]. 
  
2.5 
Holding of Farewell Parties on the Occasion of  
 
 
Transfers of Government Servants in their Honour 
 
Attention is invited to rule 3 of the Government Servants (Conduct) Rules,1964 
according to which a government servant shall not, without the pervious sanction of the local 
government, receive any complimentary or valedictory address, or take part in the 
presentation of a complimentary or valedictory address or attend a public meeting, or 
entertainment held in the honour of such other government servant or to any person. Under 
sub-rule 2(c) of the same rule, no government servant shall solicit any subscriptions in aid of 
a fund raised for non-official purposes. Instructions in amplification of this rule issued in the 
Establishment Division O. M. No. 4/39/61-EVI, dated  the 26th July  1961  enjoin   that   
subscriptions  which  tend  to  glorify  a  particular government official should be discoura-
ged. In view of this, the conduct of government servants who encourage non-officials to give 
big farewell parties on the occasion of their transfers, or who take interest in promoting a 
large number of pointless functions and inauguration ceremonies would attract the 
provisions of rule 3 of the Government Servants (Conduct) Rules,1964. 
 
2. 
It is, therefore, requested that the Ministries/Divisions/Provincial Governm-
ents may kindly bring the above rule and instructions to the notice of all government servants 
and put a stop to this tendency among them.  It may also be emphasized that breach of this 
rule will make them liable to be proceeded against under the Government Servants 
(Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 1973 . 
[Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s Letter No. 4/4/63-D.II, dated 15-3-1963]. 
                         
  Article 259(1) of the Constitution of Pakistan, 1973 reads. ― No citizen  shall accept  any title, honour or  
decoration from any foreign State except with the approval of the Federal Government‖. 
 Rules 7 and 9 of the Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964.  
Now Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules, 2020. 

Page - 760            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                            CHAPTER-8       
        
 
 
3.1 
Prohibition to be Chief Guests 
 
In rule 7 (I) of the Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964 it has been laid 
down that no government servant shall encourage meetings to be held in his honour or 
presentation of addresses of which the main object is to praise him. 
 
2. 
A question has been raised whether cases of government servants who are 
invited as chief guests would come within the mischief of this rule. 
 
3. 
The main object of this rule is to discourage government servants from 
accepting invitation to parties where they will be chief guests. In cases where acceptance 
of such invitations are considered to be unavoidable, the official concerned should take 
permission from the next higher authority.  When the government servant concerned is the 
Head of the Department or Secretary to the Government, he will obtain permission 
through the Secretary of the Ministry concerned or the Establishment Secretary as the 
case may be.   
 [Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No. 3/8/68-D.VIl (DIV), dated 27-9-1969]. 
 
3.2 
Raising of Subscriptions for Functions, etc. 
 
Enquiries are frequently received from various Ministries/Divisions on the point 
whether government servants may participate in the raising of funds for functions such as 
receptions, etc. The matter has been considered and the government have decided that, 
whenever officials undertake to collect subscriptions for cultural and other non-official 
purposes, the permission of the next higher authority must invariably be taken. This 
would not apply naturally to the Basic Democracies*. 
 
2.  
A question has, however, arisen as to what criteria should be fixed for the 
guidance of the next higher authority in considering cases for such permission. The next 
higher authorities should naturally exercise their discretion in this regard keeping in view 
the basic objectives of the order which is meant to put a check on indiscriminate raising of 
subscriptions for purposes which are not necessary from the point of view of the 
community as a whole. Any subscriptions which tend to glorify a particular government 
official should be specifically discouraged. 
[Authority.— Establishment Division‘s O.M. No.4/63/59-E.VI, dated 5-11-1960 and                
O.M. No. 4/39/61-EVI, dated 26-7-1961]. 
 
3.3 
Raising of Subscription for Funds – Regulatory Criteria 
 
In 
continuation 
of 
the 
Establishment 
Division 
Office Memorandum  
No. 4/39/61-E.VI, dated the 26th of July, 1961, the following further criteria have been 
laid down by government to regulate the raising of funds by government servants: 
 
(i) 
The ‗next higher authority‘ for the purposes of permission should be the 
next higher officer of the government servant concerned, but where the 
next higher officer is below the rank of a Head of Department, the 
                         
* Implies the present local government system. 

CHAPTER-8           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                 Page - 761 
 
 
permission of the Head of the Department concerned should be obtained 
through the next higher officer; 
 
(ii) 
No coercion or pressure should be used in the raising of funds-the basis of 
the campaign should be kept purely voluntary and every precaution should 
be taken to keep this unconnected with official matters; 
 
(iii) 
The Police and Income Tax authorities should be prohibited from taking 
part in any collection of funds; 
 
(iv) 
Collection of funds should take place outside office hours and it should not 
interfere with or hamper in the performance of the official duties of the 
government servants concerned; 
 
(v) 
The authority permitting the raising of funds should satisfy itself that these 
are utilized for the purposes for which these have been collected; 
 
(vi) 
Funds should be collected to the extent it is necessary and care should be 
taken to see that the public are not unnecessarily burdened; 
 
(vii) 
Foreign establishments and firms should not be individually approached 
but if in response to a general appeal for funds, they voluntarily contribute, 
this should be accepted; and 
 
(viii) 
All subscriptions should be duly receipted, accounted for and the accounts 
submitted to the higher officer for scrutiny. 
[Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No. 4/39/61-D.II, dated 28-4-1962]. 
 
4.1 
Grant of Permission for Acquisition  
of Property (Movable and Immovable)  
by Government Servants 
 
Clarifications to rule 11 of the Conduct Rules, 1964.— The following 
clarifications are issued for guidance of the Ministries/Divisions in partial modification of 
the instructions contained in Establishment Division O.M. No. 3/17/67-D.II, dated the 
28th September, 1967 and with reference to the amendments  made in the Government 
Servants (Conduct)Rules, 1964 vide S.R.O. No. 211 (R)/68:— 
(a) 
for purchase of land from Co-operative Housing Society or Government 
Housing Scheme no permission of the Government is necessary, but for 
construction of house on the same plot, permission of Government will be 
required under rule 11-A* of the Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964. 
(b) 
for purchase of bonds, shares or securities from the approved security market, a 
semi-government institution or through public offer by a company prior 
permission is not necessary. Permission will, however, be necessary if the 
purchase is made from sources other than these mentioned above; and 
                         
* Rule 11-A, omitted vide Estt. Div.‘s Notification SRO 984(1)/2004, dated  15-12-2004.  

Page - 762            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                            CHAPTER-8       
        
 
(c) 
If the wife of a government servant finances construction of a house from 
her independent sources of income, permission of the government will not 
be required. But if financial arrangements are being made by the 
government servant either from his own savings or from loan taken by him 
prior permission should be obtained even if the house to be constructed is in the 
name of the wife or any dependent member of the government servant. 
[Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No. 3/17/67-D.VII,(D-IV), dated 6-8-1969]. 
4.2 
Revision of Proforma for Permission Regarding  
Acquisition/ Disposal/ Construction of Movable/ 
Immovable Property 
 
The proforma for obtaining information from officers/officials for permission in 
regard to acquisition/ disposal/construction of movable/immovable property has been 
revised in order to make it elaborate.  Requests from the officers/officials for permission 
in this regard may henceforth be decided by the Ministries/Divisions concerned after 
obtaining the necessary information in the revised proforma, (Annex). 
 
2.  
As regards the officers belonging to the groups controlled by the 
Establishment Division, namely APUG and OMG, information as in the proforma may 
be obtained from the officers concerned and forwarded to Establishment Division for 
necessary action alongwith their applications. 
[Authority.— Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No.3/47/70-D.IV, dated 29-8-1978]. 
 
                         
 Add ―and Service‖. 
All Pakistan Services (Change in Nomenclature) Rules, 1973, notified vide SRO 1307(I)/73 dated 14-09-
1973, have been repealed vide SRO 89(I)/2014 dated 14-02-2014, whereby all notifications and instructions 
issued on the subject from time to time were mutatis mutandis amended.   

CHAPTER-8           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                 Page - 763 
 
 
(Annex) 
(Sl.No.4.2) 
PARTICULARS OF THE MOVABLE/IMMOVABLE PROPERTY PROPOSED TO BE BOUGHT/SOLD 
 
Description 
of property 
proposed to 
be bought, 
sold or 
constructed 
Value of 
the 
property 
Amount for 
which the 
property is 
to be 
purchased/ 
sold or 
constructed 
Sources and 
funds from 
which the 
property is  
to be purchased 
or constructed 
Whether 
permission was 
obtained from 
government for 
purchase, sale 
or construction 
of property 
Detailed 
particulars of the 
purchaser/ seller 
i.e., Name, 
Address, 
Profession and 
Relationship with 
the government 
servant, if any 
Whether the 
government 
servant had any 
dealing with 
the purchaser 
or seller during 
his service 
under 
government 
Particulars of the 
existing movable/ 
immovable 
property and value 
thereof owned by 
the government 
servant and his 
family 
1 
3 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Family:— Includes the wife and children dependent on the Government Servant.  
 
 
Signature __________________________ 
 
Designation ________________________ 
 
Ministry/Division ____________________ 
 
Dated _____________________________ 
 
Establishment Division‘s O.M. No. 3/47/70-D IV, dated 30-8-1978. 

Page - 764            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                            CHAPTER-8       
        
 
4.3 
Acquisition of Immovable Property  
by Government Servants Posted/ 
Employed In Pakistan Missions Abroad 
 
The question of acquisition of assets in the form of immovable property by 
Pakistanis residing abroad has been under consideration of the government for sometime 
past, Pakistani nationals residing abroad fall into the following broad categories:- 
 (a) Pakistani nationals who have more or less settled down abroad. Such 
persons may be employed there or may be carrying on some independent 
business or profession; 
 (b) Government servants who are Pakistani nationals employed in our 
Embassies/Missions abroad; 
 (c) Pakistani nationals employed in branches or subsidiaries abroad of 
Pakistani companies/firms. 
 
2. 
There is no objection to Pakistani nationals who have settled down abroad 
acquiring immovable property or foreign shares and securities by resorting to bank 
borrowings from their own resources provided no exchange liability is created for 
remittance from Pakistan at any stage.  If and when such persons return to Pakistan, they 
will have to transfer the income and the sales-proceeds of such properties to Pakistan as 
required in terms of the provisions of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947.  
There would also be no objection if the branches of Pakistani banks operating abroad give 
loans and advances to Pakistani settlers abroad for the purpose of acquiring properties abroad 
provided these advances and interest thereon are recovered entirely in foreign exchange and no 
exchange liability is created for remittance from Pakistan as stated above. 
 
3.  
As regards government servants who are Pakistani nationals employed in 
the Embassies/Missions abroad or other government servants posted on duty or training 
abroad, they should be discouraged from acquiring properties or foreign shares and 
securities abroad. The remuneration which such persons receive is intended to cover their 
living and other incidental expenses. If an official can manage to save funds out of his 
remuneration, such savings should be remitted to Pakistan rather than used for acquiring 
properties and foreign shares and securities abroad. 
 
4.  
Some Pakistani banks, companies and firms have been permitted to 
establish branch offices or subsidiaries abroad.  In some cases, Pakistani nationals have been 
employed in such branch offices or subsidiaries abroad.  They should also, like government 
servants, transfer their savings, if any, to Pakistan instead of acquiring assets abroad. 
 
[Authority.- Finance Division‘s O.M.No.1(14)-EF/EXP/62, dated 19-8-1963]. 
 
                         
Also refer to State Bank of Pakistan-Foreign Exchange Manual as updated upto March,2017. 

CHAPTER-8           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                 Page - 765 
 
 
4.4 
Declaration of Assets Held and Acquired by  
Government Servants and Corporation Employees 
 
Instructions regarding Declaration of Property and Assets have been issued from 
time to time, but unfortunately these have been either insufficiently understood or dealt 
with in routine. As a result, the compliance of these instructions by the Ministries/ 
Divisions/Departments etc. and by the officials themselves has remained sporadic. The 
President has also taken notice of this unsatisfactory state of affairs. 
 
2. 
The instructions on the filing of Declaration of Assets have been revised 
and consolidated for strict compliance by all concerned, as follows:- 
 
(I) 
The Declaration of Assets are to be submitted by— 
 
(a) 
all government servants of all grades, 
 
(b) 
all re-employed government servants, 
 
(c) 
all persons employed on contract, 
 
(d) 
provincial civil servants and corporation employees serving on 
deputation in the Federal Government, 
 
(e) 
all officers and employees of corporations/ autonomous bodies set 
up and/or controlled by the Federal Government. 
 
(f) 
commissioned and non-commissioned officers of the armed forces 
serving on secondment in civil posts and in corporations/autonomous 
bodies. 
 
(II) 
(a) 
The Declaration of Assets should be submitted by all concerned on 
first appointment and thereafter annually on 31st December each 
year, on the attached proforma which should be filled in and signed 
by the Declarant himself. 
 
 
(b) 
The revised proforma for declaration of assets provides for affixing 
of photographs of all officers of BS-17 and above on the first 
submission of declaration of assets under these instructions. 
 
(III) The Declarations are to be made in respect of Property and Assets held in 
the name of government servant himself and members of his family as 
defined in rule 3(1) (c) of the Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964 
reproduced below:- 
 
 
 
―Member of a government servant‘s family‖ includes– 
(i) 
his wife, child or step-child, whether residing with the 
government servant or not; and 
                         
 BPS. 
 

Page - 766            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                            CHAPTER-8       
        
 
(ii) 
any other relative of the Government Servant or his wife, when 
residing with and wholly dependent upon the government 
servant, but does not include a wife legally separated from the 
government servant, or a child or step-child who is no longer 
in any way dependent upon him, or of whose custody the 
government servant has been deprived by law‖. 
 
(IV) The Declaration should include the description/ details of immovable 
property such as land, houses required, built, or under construction 
including the property which is under mortgage or which is otherwise 
encumbered and movable property such as motor vehicles, investment or 
ownership (part or otherwise) of business enterprises, stocks, shares, 
securities, certificates, prize bonds, insurance policies and  jewellery  
having  a  total value of Rs.[50,000] or more, in terms of rule 12 of the 
Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964. 
 
(V) (a) 
It will be the responsibility of Ministries/ Divisions/ Departments/ 
Corporations/Autonomous Bodies to obtain the declaration of assets 
in respect of persons serving under them. Failure to file the 
declarations on the prescribed date or within fifteen days thereof 
construed as misconduct and the defaulters will be liable to 
disciplinary action under the rules. Action against the defaulting 
persons will be taken by the respective Ministries / Divisions / 
Departments / Organizations etc. under whom the official is serving 
for the time being in accordance with the relevant disciplinary rules. 
 
 
(b) 
A certificate to the effect that such declarations have been obtained 
from all officials should be forwarded to the Establishment Division 
by all Ministries/Divisions/ Departments by 1st March of each year. 
 
(VI) (a) 
The Declaration of Assets should be maintained and handled in the 
same manner as the confidential reports.  These should be kept on 
separate files for each individual official and maintained as 
companion files of the C.R. dossiers of the officials concerned.  The 
declaration of assets of the officials whose C.R. dossiers are not 
required to be maintained under the relevant instructions, should be 
kept in the above manner as companion files to their service books. 
 
 
(b) 
The Ministry/Division/ Department/ Corporation or Autonomous Body 
which maintains the original C.R. dossier/ Service Books of the 
officers/staff will be responsible for custody and maintenance of the 
files of Declaration of Assets in the prescribed manner. 
 
 
(c) 
For this purpose, the Declarations should be forwarded, alongwith 
lists to the respective Secretaries of the Ministries/ Divisions/Heads 
of Attached Departments/ Corporations/ Autonomous Bodies who 
                         
 Revised vide Estt. Div.‘s Notification No. S.R.O. 846(I)/85 dated 5-9-1985 from Rs. 10,000 (Ten Thousand). 

CHAPTER-8           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                 Page - 767 
 
 
are responsible for the maintenance of the C.R. dossiers of the 
concerned officials by 1st March of each year. 
 
(VII) Under a directive of the President, the Secretaries of the Ministries/ 
Divisions and Heads of Departments etc. are to be held responsible for any 
case of corruption in the Ministry/Department etc. under them.  In cases 
where the Secretary has reasons to believe that the assets have not been 
correctly reported, or are in excess of known means of income, may order 
an investigation through an internal inquiry or by FIA, to be followed by 
proceedings under disciplinary rules in the event of such charges having 
been, prima facie, established. 
 
3. 
The various instructions issued from time to time, regarding filing of 
Declaration of Assets are deemed to have been modified to the extent stated above. 
 
4. 
The Ministries/Divisions may please bring these instructions to the notice 
of the officials serving under them and the Attached Departments/ Subordinate Offices and 
Heads of Corporations/Autonomous Bodies for compliance. 
[Authority.- Estt. Secretary‘s D.O. letter No.2/2/81.D.A/D.I, dated 19-9-1982]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page - 768            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                            CHAPTER-8       
        
 
 (ANNEX) 
 
S-121 
(Revised) 
(Loose)                                              
  
Declaration of Assets for the 
              
year ending on 31st December, 20 
/on____________________                                      
(initial appointment)       
 PHOTOGRAPH  
(To be affixed by officers in 
BPS 17 & above only on the 
first declaration  under  the 
revised instruction). 
 
1. 
Name and Designation_______________________________________ 
 
with BPS__________________________________________________ 
2. 
Occupational Group/Service_____________________________(if any). 
3. 
Name of Organization where __________________________serving. 
 
DECLARATION 
 
 
I__________________S/o___________________________ 
hereby declare that the Assets, immovable and movable, described in the proforma 
overleaf duly signed, are held by me and members of my family, [ ‗family‘ as defined in 
Rule 3(1) (c) of the Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964] on 31st December, 20  
/on____________________________________________________________________
_____________________(the date of initial appointment). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Signature _______________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Designation ______________ 
 
 
Rules 3(1) (c) of Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964. 
 
―Member of a government servant‘s family‖ includes:- 
(i) 
his wife, child or step-child, whether residing with the Government servant 
or not; and 
(ii) 
any other relative of the government servant or his wife, when residing 
with and wholly dependent upon the government servant, but does not 
include a wife legally separated from the government servant, or a child or 
step-child who is no longer in any way dependent upon him or of whose 
custody the government servant has been deprived by law.‖ 
 
Reference to a wife shall be construed as reference to a husband where the 
government servant is a woman. 

CHAPTER-8           ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                 Page - 769 
 
 
For the year ending 31st December, 20….                  
S-121(Revised) (Loose) 
 
PROFORMA 
(See Sl. No. 4.6) 
 
 
I,................S/D/o................. Employed in ...........................................hereby declare that no immovable and movable property, i.e,  bonds, 
shares, certificates, securities, insurance policies and jewellery having a total value of Rs [50,000]or more is held by me and members of my family, 
except as stated below:- 
 
Name 
In whose name 
held 
Province & District 
in which the 
property is situated 
Nature of property 
and extent of 
interest held 
Approximate 
value of 
property 
How acquired 
whether by purchase, 
gift or by inheritance 
Remarks 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. 
For the period of......................... 
 
 
20 ........................................... 
 
2. 
Accretions/decrements made 
 
 
during ......................................... 
 
 
20 ............................................. 
 
Members of family.- As defined in Rule 3(1) (c) of Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Signature ................................. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Designation...........................
                         
 Subs. vide Estt. Div.‘s Notification No. SRO 846(I)/85  dated 5.9.1985. 

Page - 770             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
 
5.1 Amendments in Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964 and  
 
 
Submission of Declaration of Income and Assets Held and  
 
 
 
Acquired by Government Servants and Corporation Employees  
  
By amendments in the Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964  vide SRO 
No. 984(I)/2004, dated 15-12-2004 rules 11 and 11A pertaining to buying/ selling of 
moveable/immoveable property and construction of building etc. have been omitted. By 
virtue of substitution of sub-rule (2) of rule-12, every government servant shall submit to 
the government, through the usual channel an annual declaration of income, assets and 
expenses for each financial year, (from 1st July to 30th June), showing any increase or 
decrease of property as shown in the declaration under sub-rule (1) or the last annual 
return, as the case may be. According to the new sub-rule (3) of the rule 12, declaration of 
assets proforma shall be opened in the section concerned each year and entered into the 
relevant database. To meet the requirements of the amended provisions of rule-12 of the 
Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964, a revised Declaration of Assets Proforma 
has been devised (Annex).  
 
2. 
Following guidelines may be noted for strict compliance: 
(i) 
Declaration of Income, Assets & Expenses are to be submitted on 
prescribed proforma by all government servants in all BPS including 
all persons re-employed/employed on contract. 
(ii) 
First Declaration of Assets on the revised proforma containing full 
details assets and liabilities be submitted by all concerned for the 
Financial Year ending on 30th June by 31st July. The government 
servants appointed after 30th June submit Declaration of Assets as on 
the date of their first appointment. Thereafter, every government 
servant is required to submit declaration of his income and assets on 
the close of every financial year i.e. 30th June by 31st July each year. 
(iii) The declaration of assets belonging to officers of PAS, PSP, 
Secretariat Group and OMG officers only will be forwarded to the 
Establishment Division. 
(iv) A certificate to the effect that such declaration has been obtained 
from all officers/officials should be forwarded to the Establishment 
Division by all the Ministries/ Divisions by 1st of September each 
year. The controlling Ministries/Divisions will submit a consolidated 
certificate in respect of Departments etc. controlled by them. 
(v) 
It will be the responsibility of Ministries/Divisions/ Departments/ 
corporations/Autonomous Bodies to obtain the declaration of assets 
in respect of persons serving under them, take disciplinary actions 
against the defaulting officers/officials who do not submit declarations 
by the prescribed date or within fifteen days thereof. 
(vi) 
Ministries/Divisions/Departments/Corporations /Autonomous Bodies 
shall also maintain database regarding annual declaration of income, 
assets and expenses in respect of the officers/officials administratively 
controlled by them. 
[Authority:- Establishment Division‘s O.M. No. 2/1/2004-D-4, dated 22nd Dec., 2004] 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 771 
 
 
 
5.2 
Declaration of Assets Held and  
Acquired by Government Servants  
for the year ending 30th June, 20__ 
 
Refer to Rule 12 of the Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964 and 
administrative instructions issued by the Establishment Division from time to time, on the 
subject cited above. It is requested to obtain Declarations of Assets and Liabilities by 
August 31, 20__ for the year ending June 30, 20__ from the officers/officials belonging to 
occupational cadres serving under you, on the prescribed proforma (Annex), which is also 
available on website ―http:www.establishment.gov.pk‖ of the Establishment Division. 
 
2. 
Establishment Division maintains the record of Declaration of Assets of 
PAS, PSP, Secretariat Group and OMG Officers. Therefore, Declarations of the officers 
belonging to these Groups should be forwarded to Establishment Division. Officers 
belonging to these Groups serving under the respective Provincial Governments may send 
an advance copy of their Declaration to Establishment Division, to avoid delay. The 
Declarations of Assets in respect of all other Service Groups/Cadres will be maintained 
by their respective Ministries/Divisions/Departments. 
 
3. 
It is pertinent to mention that non-compliance of the above Rules & 
Instructions tantamounts to ―Misconduct‖ within the meaning of Rule 2(4) of the 
Government Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 1973. Further, in light of Rule 7 
(j) of Civil Servants Promotion (BS-18 to BS-21) Rules, 2019 ―the civil servant who has 
not submitted his/her annual declaration of assets forms for the last five years‖ will be 
deferred from promotion in the respective promotion boards. 
[Authority.— Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 2/1/2013-D-4 dated 06-08-2020] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                         
 Now Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules, 2020. 

Page - 772             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
 
Annex 
 
GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN 
CABINET SECRETARIAT 
ESTABLISHMENT DIVISION 
 
DECLARATION OF INCOME AND ASSETS 
Financial Year Ending on 30th June   
 
 
 
1.    Name 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                     NIC No. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                     N.T. No. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
2.   Basic Pay Scale 
 
 
Occupational Group 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Service/Department 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                   Present Position Held 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Present Residential Address 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. Income  
Salary 
 
(During the 
 
Financial year) 
 
5. Expenses 
 
Utilities (Electricity, Gas, 
Total Household 
    (Approx.) 
 
        Telephone etc.)  
 expenses  
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
6. Private Foreign traveling 
Country/Countries Period of Stay 
 
Approx. expenses 
    (Self, Spouse & Children 
visited 
 
 
From 
to___ 
Rs. 
During F.Y  
 
 
 
 
 
7. Children‘s Education 
 
Name(s) of children  
Educational institutions 
attended 
(inland & Abroad)  
 
 
 
 
during F.Y.  
 
 
 
 
 
8. Club Membership  
Name of Club(s) 
 
 
Membership No. 
Phone (R) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mobile 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rs. 
 Rs. 
Rs
 
Rs.  
 
 
 
 
 
Rs.  
 
 
 
   

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 773 
 
 
9. 
Immovable Assets (Agri & Non-Agri lands, House properties, Commercial & Industrial properties, 
Open plots of all types) 
 
 
Identification & nature of Asset(s) 
Mode of acquisition/year 
Cost of acquisition 
a) 
 
 
 
b) 
 
 
 
c) 
 
 
 
d) 
 
 
 
e) 
 
 
 
f) 
 
 
 
g) 
 
 
 
h) 
 
 
 
i) 
 
 
 
j) 
 
 
 
k) 
 
 
 
l) 
 
 
 
m) 
 
 
 
 
10. 
Movable Assets (Cash in hand, Motor vehicles, Jewellery, Household items, Equipment, Business 
 
Capital etc.) 
 
 
Identification & nature of Asset(s) 
Mode of acquisition/year 
Cost of acquisition 
a) 
 
 
 
b) 
 
 
 
c) 
 
 
 
d) 
 
 
 
e) 
 
 
 
f) 
 
 
 
g) 
 
 
 
h) 
 
 
 
i) 
 
 
 
j) 
 
 
 
k) 
 
 
 
l) 
 
 
 
m) 
 
 
 
 
11. 
Assets held as Attorney 
 
 
Identification & nature of Asset(s) 
Nature of Power of Attorney 
(Revocable/Irrevocable 
Nature & Address of  
the Legal Owner 
a) 
 
 
 
b) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page - 774             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
12. 
Assets disposed off during the year 
 
 
Identification & nature of Asset(s) 
Date of disposal 
Amount received as  
Sales proceed (Rs.) 
a) 
 
 
 
b) 
 
 
 
c) 
 
 
 
d) 
 
 
 
 
13. 
Investments (Bonds, Shares, Certificates, deposits/Advances, Loans granted etc.) 
 
 
Details of Bonds held 
Investments 
 
Bond No. (s) 
Denomination Rs. 
 
Rs. 
a) 
 
 
 
Rs. 
b) 
 
 
 
Rs. 
c) 
 
 
 
Rs. 
d) 
 
 
 
Rs. 
 
14. 
Banks Accounts (Current, Saving, Deposit A/c & F.C. A/cs) 
 
 
A/c No. & Bank Branch 
Year of Opening 
Main source of deposits 
Balance as on 
30.6 (Rs.) 
a) 
 
 
 
Rs. 
b) 
 
 
 
Rs. 
c) 
 
 
 
Rs. 
d) 
 
 
 
Rs. 
 
15. 
Total Assets (9-14)  
 
 
Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
16. 
Liabilities (Departmental/Bank loans, Over drafts, Mortgages secured, private loans etc.) 
 
 
Outstanding liabilities  (A) 
Liabilities paid off during the year  (B) 
a) 
 
Rs. 
 
Rs. 
b) 
 
Rs. 
 
Rs. 
c) 
 
Rs. 
 
Rs. 
d) 
 
Rs. 
 
Rs. 
 
15-16 (A)  
Net worth  
 
 
Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
As on 30.6. 
 
 
 
Net worth declared previously 
 
 
 
Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
As on 30.6. 
 
 
 
Signature ____________________________________ 
Name 
 
 
 
 
 
Designation 
 
 
 
 
Name of the Organization/Deptt.__________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Place 
 
 
 
 
 
Date 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 775 
 
 
INSTRUCTIONS 
1. 
If the space provided in the form is found inadequate or some explanation is 
required, a separate page may be attached/annexed. 
2. 
All assets should be valued at cost and in the cases of assets acquired through 
gift name, address of the donor and donees relationship with him is to be 
declared. 
3. 
Income declared at Serial 4 must include income earned by the spouse & 
children as well. 
4. 
Information requested must be completed. No column should be left blank. 
Columns which are not applicable should be crossed. 
5. 
All assets owned by the officer & his family members (Family as defined in Rule 
3(1) (c) of Conduct Rules 1964) should be declared. Assets acquired by major 
children dependents & others where funds have been provided by the officer are 
also to be declared. 
6. 
Assets owned partly or acquired on ―Hire purchase Agreement‖ or installment 
should also be declared. 
7. 
If any exact figure cannot be inserted an estimated/approx figure may be given. 
8. 
Sale proceeds of assets disposed off during the relevant financial year must be 
declared under the head ―other sources‖ (Serial 4). 
9. 
If there is no change in Assets over the previous year (for which the declaration 
had been filed) relevant columns (Serial 9, 10 & 11) may be marked ―As 
Before‖. 
10. 
At Serial 11 assets held by others as attorney on behalf of declarant, his spouse 
or dependent children are also to be declared. 
11. 
Expenses against utilities (Serial 5) should include bills paid against all meters 
(Gas & Electricity installed on the residence) and telephone connections (including 
Mobile) in use of the of officer, spouse & dependent children. 
12. 
Notwithstanding the applicability of any other law for the time being in- force, 
this declaration is being filed under Conduct Rule 1964 and any breach therefore 
(including concealment of assets or giving wrong information) is punishable 
under RSO* 2000.  
                         
*Since Removal from Service (Special Powers) Ordinance, 2000, stands repealed vide Section 2 (1) of the Act 
No.III of 2010, notified vide Estt. Division‘s O.M.No. 3/10/2010-R.II dated 17-03-2010. 

Page - 776             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
5.3 
Quarterly Statement Regarding Permissions Granted 
to the Federal Government Officers Under Government Servants 
(Conduct) Rules, 1964 by the Provincial  
Government to Buy and Sell Assets 
 
The Chief Secretaries of Provincial Governments have been allowed to grant 
permissions to the officers belonging to All Pakistan Services who were for the time being 
serving in Provinces to buy and sell assets under the Government Servants (Conduct) 
Rules, 1964. However, the Establishment Division has no record regarding the number of 
such permissions granted under these delegated powers to APUG officers and officers/ 
cadres (other than PCS) during their posting in a province on deputation basis. 
 
2. 
All Provincial Governments shall submit the information regarding cases 
disposed of by the orders of the Chief Secretary in respect of *APUG officers on the 
proforma attached herewith, on quarterly basis as in the enclosed statement (Annex). 
[Authority:- Estab. Div.‘s O.M. No. 1/3/99/D-3, dated 30th November, 2002] 
Annex 
Cases Disposed of by the Orders of Chief Secretary, Government of 
______________ under the Provision of the Govt. Servants  
(Conduct) Rules, 1964 during the Calendar Years 2001-2002  
(onwards), to the Federal Government Officers Posted in the  
Provinces for the Time Being  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name, Designation, 
BPS/Group/Service 
and Cadre of the 
Officer 
Description of 
Property Sold/ 
Purchased 
Copy of Proforma as Prescribed 
by the Federal Government on 
which Permission was Sought in 
Case of Rule 11 & 11-A be 
attached 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.1 
Private Medical Practice by Government Servants 
 
The private practice by unqualified practitioners, will continue to apply. Further, 
the private practice of homeopathy by the government servants who are registered under 
the Unani, Ayurvedic and Homeopathic Practitioners Act, 1965, will be subject to rule 16 
of the Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964. 
[Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.6/7/89-D.3, dated 15-3-1990]. 
                         
 All Pakistan Services (Change in Nomenclature) Rules, 1973, notified vide SRO 1307(I)/73 dated 14-09-
1973, have been repealed vide SRO 89(I)/2014 dated 14-02-2014, whereby all notifications and instructions 
issued on the subject from time to time were mutatis mutandis amended.   
 Provincial Civil Service. 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 777 
 
 
 
6.2 
Transaction of Insurance Business  
by Government Servants 
 
It has been brought to the notice of the government that certain government 
servants transact insurance business on behalf of their wives, sisters and other members of 
family living with or dependent upon them in whose names they have managed to secure 
agencies of insurance companies. Since during performance of official duties such 
government servants come across other government servants and private parties, they 
manage to obtain insurance policies from them by taking undue advantage of their official 
position. This state of affairs not only brings disrepute to the departments to which they 
belong, but also distracts their attention from official duties and retards their efficiency. 
 
2. 
According to rule 16 of the Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964, no 
government servant can engage himself in any trade or business, directly or indirectly, 
without the previous sanction of the government. Such transactions, therefore, constitute a 
violation of that rule and render the government servants concerned liable to disciplinary 
action under the Government Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules. 
 
3. 
Ministries/Divisions are advised that it should generally be made known to 
all concerned that government view this situation with concern and desire that government 
servants who indulge in this business indirectly through their family members should 
abandon it forthwith. 
[Authority.— Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.3/9/66-D.II, dated 15-8-1966]. 
 
6.3 
Private Work During and After Office Hours 
 
It has been brought to the notice of the Prime Minister that in order to supplement 
their income, a large number of low paid government servants do private work in addition to 
their government jobs.  Some of them work as ushers in the afternoon, evening and night 
shows of cinemas while others are often absent from their jobs under government as they 
attend to private work even during office hours. 
 
2. 
Government work inevitably suffers on account of these government servants 
performing private jobs during or outside office hours. It also aggravates the unemployment 
problem. The Prime Minister has, therefore, been pleased to direct that action should be 
taken to put a stop to this objectionable trend among government servants. 
[Authority.— Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No.1/20/76-D-IV, dated 6-3-1976]. 
 
6.4 
Future Good Conduct of Pensioners  
 
Attention is invited to clause (1) of Article 351 of the Civil Service Regulations 
which reads as follows:— 
 
―Future good conduct is an implied condition of every grant of a pension. The 
Local Government and the Government of Pakistan reserve to themselves the 
right of withholding or withdrawing a pension or any part of it, if the 
                         
 Now Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules,2020. 

Page - 778             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
pensioner be convicted of serious crime or be guilty of grave misconduct.‖ 
 
2.  
It has been decided that the provision of the above Article should be strictly 
enforced in all cases by the pension sanctioning authorities. In cases where a pensioner 
commits misconduct, prompt action should be taken to withhold or withdraw his pension or 
any part of it. 
 
3.  
Misconduct in such cases would mean conduct prejudicial to good behaviour 
or unbecoming of a gentleman. The decision of the President on any question whether any 
act on the part of the pensioner is misconduct or not shall be final and binding. 
[Authority.- Establishment Secretary‘s D.O. letter No.5/4/73-D, IV, dated 11-8-1973]. 
 
6.5 
Taking Part in Politics by Pensioners  
 
Attention is invited to clause (2) of Article 351 of the Civil Service Regulations 
which reads as follows:— 
 
―(2) Except with the previous sanction of the Central Government, no pensioner 
shall, within a period of two years from the date of his/her retirement, take 
part in any election or engage in political activity of any kind.‖ 
 
2.  
It would be noticed from the above that the pensioner can participate in 
political activity within two years of his retirement from service only with the previous 
sanction of the Federal Government. It has, however, been decided that as a matter of policy 
no permission should in future be granted to any pensioner to engage in political activity of 
any kind. 
 
3.  
It may be clarified that political activity would include activities like 
affiliation with political parties, public speeches, writing articles, giving statements, 
attending political meetings, making monetary contribution for political purposes etc. This 
clarification may be brought to the notice of the government servants and also to pensioners 
who have not yet completed two years from the date of their retirement. 
[Authority.- Establishment Secretary‘s  D.O. letter No. 5/3/73-D.IV, dated 31-7-1973]. 
 
7.1 
Employment of Dependent Family Members of a 
Government Servant in Foreign Missions in Pakistan 
 
A question has arisen whether dependent family members of a government servant 
can seek employment in foreign missions in Pakistan. The matter has been considered and it 
has been decided that government servants should not allow their wives to seek employment 
in foreign diplomatic missions in Pakistan. 
[Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No. 1/148/76-D.IV, dated 23-11-1976]. 
 
7.2 
Engagement in Trade, Business etc.  
by Spouses of Government Servants 
 
Under the Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964, no government servant is 
                         
 Federal. 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 779 
 
 
allowed to engage in any trade or undertake any employment or work, other than his official 
duties, except with the previous sanction of the government. There is, however, no bar to the 
spouses of government servants taking employment or engaging in any trade or profession.  It 
has come to the notice of government that the wives of some government servants have been 
engaging in trade and business where influence of the husband could possible be misused.  In 
such cases, the possibility of public interest being jeopardized cannot be ruled out. 
 
2. 
In order to safeguard the public interest in such cases, it has been decided 
that all government officials whose spouses have under-taken some private job or are 
engaged in business and trade may be directed to render a certificate to the Secretary of the 
Ministry/Division or the Head of the Department concerned that the profession, trade or 
business in which his or her spouse is engaged is in no way under his/her official influence. 
[Authority.-Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No. 7/1/79-D-IV, dated 1-9-1979] 
 
7.3 
Instructions under Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964 
Regarding Procedure for Engaging in Private Business, Trade and 
Consultancy Work  
 
Government servants in addition to their official duties are known to engage in 
private business, trade and consultancy work which provide them with pecuniary benefits. 
However, it has been observed that in many such instances, procedural requirements 
under the Government Servants (Conduct) Rules,1964 are either not complied with in 
letter and spirit, or are in many cases, totally ignored.  
 
2. 
Under Rule 16 of the Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964, 
government servants are not allowed to engage in private business, trade, or employment/ 
consultancy work., except with the previous sanctions of the government, and provide 
such activity does not amount to conflict of interest in terms of the officer‘s position or 
obligations as a government servant. Further, a government servant shall not undertake or 
shall discontinue such work, if so directed by the Government. Also, a government 
servant who has any doubt about the propriety of undertaking any particular work should 
refer the matter for orders of the Government.  
 
3. 
 The above provisions of the Government Servants (Conduct) Rules,1964 
need to be complied with in letter and spirit. These may therefore be circulated to all 
government servants belonging to all occupational cadres falling under the Federal 
Government jurisdiction. Any violation of these instructions tantamounts to misconduct 
and is liable to be proceeded against under the Government Servants (Efficiency and 
Discipline) Rules,1973. 
[Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.1/20/1976-D-3, dated 23-07-2020]. 
 
                         
Now Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules, 2020. 

Page - 780             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
7.4 
Use of Social Media by Government Servants 
 
Kindly refer to Establishment Division‘s Circular No. 1/20/1976-D-3, dated 23rd 
July, 2020 whereby detailed instructions under Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 
1964, governing participation of government servants in difference media forums 
including social media platforms were issued for compliance. 
 
2. 
Under the Rules ibid, no government servant can participate in any media 
platform except with the express permission of the Government. Rule 18 of the Rules ibid 
bars a government servant from sharing official information or document with a 
government servant unauthorized to receive it or a private person or press. Further, Rule 
22 of the Rules ibid refrains a government servant from making any statement of fact or 
opinion which is capable of embarrassing the Government in any document published or 
in any communication made to the press or in any public utterance or television 
programme or radio broadcast delivered by him or her. Furthermore, Rules 21, 25, 25-A 
and 25-B of the Rules ibid bar a government servant from expressing views against 
ideology and integrity of Pakistan or any government policy or decision. Besides, they 
also bar a government servant from offering views on any media platform which may 
either harm the national security or friendly relations with foreign states; or offend public 
order, decency or morality; or amount to contempt of court or defamation or incitement to 
an offence; or, propagate sectarian creeds. 
 
3. 
Despite the aforementioned instructions and the guiding legal frame-work, it 
has been observed that government servants often engage themselves with social media 
i.e. websites and applications that enable users to create and share contents or participate 
in social networking /virtual communities/online groups. They, while using different 
social media platforms including Facebook, Twitter, WhatsApp, Instagram, Microblog-
ging etc. to air their views on a host of subject, sometimes indulge in actions or behavior 
that does not conform to the required standards of official conduct, as envisaged in the 
Rules ibid. Such actions range from unauthorized relaying of the official information to 
disseminating the wrong or misleading information to airing of political or secretarian 
views etc. 
 
4. 
In view of the foregoing, it is expedient to issue the following instructions 
for governing use of social media platforms by government servants:- 
i. 
The same instructions as are applicable to government servants while 
speaking at public fora or publishing articles in print media, shall apply, 
mutatis mutandis, to the use of social media by them. 
ii. 
As provided in Rule 18 of the Rules ibid, they shall not indulge in 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 781 
 
 
unauthorized disclosure of the official information or sharing of the 
official documents they come across during the course of performing their 
duties, via social media. 
iii. 
In order to maintain their impartiality and objectivity in performance, they 
shall not partake in any discussion on social media or exchange or forward 
information or message that express their opinion on political issues. 
iv. 
They shall not participate in furthering of any information especially 
pertaining to government matters that, prima facie, appears to be 
unauthentic and misleading. 
v. 
They shall not make any disparaging remarks aimed at any individual or 
group or sect or faith and shall uphold values guiding the Civil Service at 
all times. They are advised to observe discretion and moderation in use of 
the Social Media and uphold high standards of propriety. 
5. 
It is, however, clarified that the instructions contained at para 4 are not 
intended to discourage any constructive and positive use of social media by a government 
organization for engaging with the public to solicit feedback on a government policy, 
suggestions for improvement in service delivery and resolution of their complaints.  
However, such an organization shall edit their social media platforms continuously or 
frequently to re move offensive, inappropriate and objectionable remarks. 
6. 
All government servants are required to comply with the above 
instructions in letter and spirit. These may, therefore, be circulated to all government 
servants belonging to all the occupational cadres falling in the jurisdiction of the Federal 
Government. Violation of one or more of these instructions will tantamount to misconduct 
and shall invite disciplinary action against the delinquent government servant under Civil 
Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 2020. Further, in case of a violation 
committed on a group platform the ‗Administrators‘‘ or the ‗Admin‘, if they are serving 
government servants, shall also be liable to the disciplinary proceedings. 
7. 
All Federal Secretaries/Additional Secretaries (Incharge)/Service or Cadre 
Administrators/Chief Secretaries are requested to ensure implementation of these instructions. 
[Authority:—Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 14/04/2021-D-II dated 25-08-2021.] 
 
 

Page - 782             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
 
7.5 
Membership of Private Associations  
Connected with Social Work 
 
It has been brought to the notice of the Establishment Division that permission was 
refused to a government servant to become an office-holder of a private association, whose 
activities are confined to social work only and whose character is non-political, on the 
ground that membership of such associations is barred to government servants. Attention of 
the Ministry of Finance, etc. is drawn to rule 16 of the Government Servants (Conduct) 
Rules, 1964 and the note thereunder and it is stated that there is no bar to government 
servants becoming office bearers of such associations, provided they inform their immediate 
departmental superiors who will decide, with reference to the said rule and note, whether the 
matter should be reported for the orders of government. 
[Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No. 4/1/49-Ests.(SE), dated 8-6-1949]. 
 
7.6 
Association with Private Trusts, Foundations, etc. 
 
The Government of Pakistan have considered the desirability or otherwise of 
serving government servants being associated with private trusts, foundations and similar 
other institutions which are not sponsored by the government itself, and have decided that no 
serving officer should associate himself with any such association or organization. 
 
2.  
These orders will not apply to judges of the High Courts and Supreme Court 
of Pakistan. 
[Authority.— Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.4/8/63-D-II, dated 7-6-1963 read with O.M. of even  
number dated 8-7-1963]. 
 
7.7 
Prosecution of Studies by Government 
Servants in Educational Institutions 
 
A reference is invited to the Establishment Division O.M. No.4/24/59-VI, dated the 
3rd May, 1960.  It is stated that on further consideration, it has been decided that:— 
 (1) Government servants intending to take-up a course of study at educational 
institutions should be required to take prior permission of the Head of the 
Department. 
 (2) No such permission should be granted unless the Head of the Department is 
satisfied that the prosecution of studies will not interfere with the government 
servants‘ official duties. 
 (3) Permission granted may be withdrawn, if the Head of the Department is 
convinced that the government servant is taking part in politics or 
prosecution of such studies is interfering with the satisfactory performance of 
the duties. 
[Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.4/9/63-D.II, dated  23-9-1964]. 
 
7.8 
Appearing at an Examination as Private  
Candidates by Government Servants 
 
A question has been raised whether permission is necessary for a government 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 783 
 
 
servant for appearing at an examination as a private candidate. The matter has been 
considered in consultation with the Home Affairs Division and the two Provincial 
Governments and it has been decided that:— 
(a) 
In case of those government officials who are prosecuting studies in 
educational institutions with the permission of the Head of Department no 
further permission is required for appearing in the examination. 
(b) 
In case of those who want to prosecute studies in spare time without 
attending any educational institution, no permission is necessary. For 
appearing in the examination, the Head of the Department may grant leave 
provided the government servant concerned can be spared without 
detriment to the work of the government. 
[Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.4/9/63-D-VII(D.IV), dated 18-8-1969]. 
 
8.1 
Bar Against Naming of Institutions, Projects, Roads, Streets 
etc. in the Country after the Names of Government Servants 
 
The instructions issued by the Federal Government from time to time for naming 
institutions, projects, roads, etc. have become out of date.  The matter has been 
reconsidered by the Government of Pakistan, and it has been decided to lay down the 
following guidelines on the subject in supersession of all previous orders:— 
 (i) 
No institution, road, street, etc., should be named after a government 
servant or a public representative while he is still alive. 
 (ii) No institution, official or semi-official should be allowed to be named after 
a non-Pakistani without the permission of the Federal Government. 
 (iii) British names of towns, institutions, settlements etc. should be gradually 
replaced by Pakistani or Islamic names. 
 (iv) Institutions and projects like bridges, buildings, roads, streets, etc. may be 
named after the following:— 
(a) 
The founder of the nation and persons who were in the forefront of 
the freedom movement, and took a prominent part in the creation of 
Pakistan. 
(b) 
National personalities (no longer alive) with unblemished record of 
service to the nation. 
(c) 
Heroes who have laid down their lives for the defence of the country 
in war. 
(d) 
Art and cultural institutions may be named after dead artists of national 
fame. The same principle can be followed in respect of educational 
institutions, libraries, scientific and technical institutions etc. 
(e) 
Principal donors of any building or institution built out of or for 
charity. 
                         
 Now Interior Division. 
 The word ‗two‘ may be read ‗four‘. 

Page - 784             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
(f) 
Living or dead heads of state/government of foreign countries 
friendly towards Pakistan. 
(v) 
Defence installations, military lines and institutions in cantonments and 
army stations may be named after war ―shaheeds‖. 
(vi) No sports tournaments would be named after Governors, Ministers, 
government officials or public representatives of their wives. 
 
2. 
Permission of the competent authority in the Federal Government or the 
Provincial Government concerned (President/ Governor as the case may be) shall be 
obtained in advance for the naming of institutions etc., on the basis of the above guidelines.  
In the case of defence installations etc., mentioned at (v) above, prior approval of the Chief 
of Staff Army/Navy/Air Force should be obtained. 
[Authority.- Cabinet Secretary‘s letter No.107/21-78-Min., dated 13-5-1978 to all Provincial 
Governments with copies to Ministries/Divisions]. 
 
8.2 
Participation in Foreign Cultural  
Associations or Organizations 
 
Government of Pakistan have had under their consideration the desirability or 
otherwise of government servants participating in foreign cultural associations or 
organizations and have decided that no government servant should associate himself with 
any such associations or organizations. 
[Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No. 4/26/60-E.VI, dated 17-6-1961]. 
 
8.3 
Membership of Foreign Cultural  
Associations/Organizations 
 
Government have since further decided to authorize the Secretary of the Ministry 
concerned to grant permission, in consultation with the Ministry of Home Affairs, to 
continue the existing membership of such organization, by a government servant who is 
committed and cannot extricate himself.  In new cases, in which also the Ministry of Home 
Affairs** should be consulted, the policy should be to discourage new membership in the 
interest of the proper performance of official duties. 
[Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No. 4/26/60-D.II, dated 16-9-1961]. 
 
9.1 
Membership of British Library 
 
A question arose as to whether the restrictive orders should be applicable also to 
the membership of the British Council Library and other organizations of like nature.  It 
has been decided that there should be no objection to officers becoming members of the 
British Council Library and similar organizations. 
[Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No. 4/26/60-D.II, dated 15-11-1961]. 
Note:— 
For definition of foreign cultural association, please see Section 2 (a) of the Foreign Cultural 
Associations (Regulation and Functions) Ordinance, 1975. 
                         
 Prime Minister; Chief Minister. 
 Ministry of Interior (Interior Division). 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 785 
 
 
 
9.2 
Unauthorized Communication of  
Official Documents or Information 
 
The Rules of Business contain a provision to the effect that no information 
acquired directly or indirectly from official documents or relating to official matters shall 
be communicated by a government servant to the press, to non-officials or even officials 
belonging to other government offices, unless he has been generally or specially 
empowered to do so.  It has been brought to the notice of the Cabinet Division that the 
implications of the above rule are not fully appreciated by government servants with the 
result that information contained in official documents finds its way to non-officials or 
officials belonging to other government offices and through them to outsiders. Ministry of 
Finance, etc., are requested kindly to bring the matter to the notice of all government 
servants under their administrative control and warn them that they should not talk about 
or discuss official matters coming to their knowledge directly or indirectly with outsiders 
or even with officials belonging to other government offices. 
 
2. 
It may further be brought to the notice of the government servants that a 
provision to the same effect as in the Rules of Business, 1973 is made in rule 18 of the 
Government Servants Conduct Rules,1964 and an infringement thereof can be the subject 
of departmental proceedings. It is also an offence under Section 5 of the Official Secrets 
Act, 1923. 
[Authority.— Cabinet Division‘s O.M. No. Cord.(1)-8/97/58, dated 28-11-1958]. 
 
10.1 Premature Leakage of Information to the Press/Media 
 
Instances have come to the notice of the government where information 
regarding its policies and other activities was communicated to the press before these 
policies etc., had been finalized, by sources which were not competent to release or 
indicate that information. The premature leakage of such information places the 
government in an embarrassing position. 
 
2.  
Communication to the press/media or to a Government servant 
unauthorized to receive it or to a non-official person of any statement facts or opinion or 
other information by a Government servant which is likely to embarrass the Government 
is prohibited under rule 22 of the government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964 and any 
infringement of that rule is cognizable under the Government Servants (Efficiency and 
Discipline) Rules, 1973. 
 
3.  
It is therefore, imperative to bring these provisions of Rules to the notice 
of all Government Servants for strict compliance. In case of violation of these 
Rules/instructions, the defaulting Government servants may be proceeded under 
*Government Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 1973. 
[Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.1/20/76-D-IV-D.3, dated 02-07-2011]. 
                         
Now Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules, 2020. 

Page - 786             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
 
10.2 
Instructions under Government Servants (Conduct) Rules,1964 
Regarding Procedure for Participating in Electronic, Print and 
Social Media Platforms 
 
Various instances have come to the notice of Establishment Division that 
Government Servants participate in electronic, print and social media platforms to air 
their views on a variety of subjects. However, it has been observed that in many such 
instances, procedural requirements under the Government Servants (Conduct) Rules,1964 
are either not complied with in letter and spirit, or in many cases, totally ignored.  
 
2. 
Under the Government Servants (Conduct) Rules,1964, no government 
servant can participate in any media platforms, except with the express permission of the 
Government. Rules 20,21,22,25,25-A,25-B of the Government Servants (Conduct) 
Rules,1964 bar government servants from expressing views against policy or ideology of 
Pakistan, which may harm the security of Pakistan or friendly relations with foreign 
states, offend public order, decency or morality, or amount to contempt of court, 
defamation or incitement to an offence, besides propagation of sectarian creeds, and also 
places a bar on government servants from taking part in any public demonstration 
directed against a government decision or policy. 
 
3. 
Attention is also invited to Rule 22 of the Rules Ibid which bars a 
government servant from making any statement of fact or opinion which is capable of 
embarrassing the Government in any document published or in any communication made 
to the press or in any public utterance or television programme or in any radio broadcast 
delivered by him. Also, Rule 18 bars the government servant from communicating any 
official document or information to a Government servant unauthorized to receive it or to 
a non-official person or to the press.  
 
4. 
The above provisions of the Government Servants (Conduct) Rules,1964 
need to be complied with in letter and spirit. These may, therefore, be circulated to all 
government servants belonging to all the occupational cadres falling under the Federal 
Government jurisdiction. Any violation of these instructions will tantamount to 
misconduct, and is liable to be proceeded against under the Government Servants 
(Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 1973. 
[Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No.1/20/1976-D-3, dated 23-07-2020]. 
 
10.3 
Consultation with Principal Information Officer for Projection 
 of Government Policies Programmes and Activities 
 
According to the existing instructions, only Ministers and Secretaries, and such 
officers as may be specifically authorized, may act as official spokesman of the 
government and all official news and information is required to be conveyed to the press 
and the public through the Press Information Department. 
                         
Now Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules, 2020. 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 787 
 
 
 
2. 
The Principal Information Officer serves the Government of Pakistan as a 
whole, in addition to arranging issuance of publicity material emanating from 
ministries/conferences/press briefings for Ministers, Secretaries and official spokesman of 
the government.  As such, it is desirable that the Principal Information Officer be consulted 
on the medium to be employed for projection of government policies, programmes and 
activities according to the situation and the subject matter. 
 
3. 
(i)   Press Conferences.— These shall be called by Ministers or 
Secretaries/other officials who may be authorized by their respective 
Ministers. 
 
 
(ii)  Press Statements.— On matters of policy which have already been 
approved by government and which require publicity and proper 
projection press releases may be authorized by Secretary concerned 
and issued through the Press Information Department. 
 
 
(iii)  Press Notes: On matters of public interest, other than policy, press 
notes of purely informative nature may be issued by the Heads of 
Attached Departments through the Press Information Department. 
 
4. 
There is a possibility of incorrect or unauthorized information being 
collected by journalists and press representatives in informal contacts with officials. 
Attention is drawn to rule 18 of the Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964 which 
prohibits unauthorized communication of official documents of information to a government 
servant unauthorized to receive it, or to a non-official person, or to the press. All government 
servants are warned to be careful in this matter. Any breach of this rule coming to notice will 
be severely dealt with.  
[Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No.4/1/72-D.IV, dated 3-2-1972]. 
 
10.4 
Letters to Editor 
 
The Ministries/Divisions are aware that most of the people explain their difficulties 
through the ―Letters to Editor‖ columns of newspapers with the intention of seeking redress 
of their grievances from concerned government departments/agencies. 
 
2.  
This Ministry holds the view that if the position is clarified by the 
government departments/agencies by addressing letters to the editors of newspapers in which 
letters concerning them are published, it will not only clarify their position but also ensure 
removal of genuine public grievances. 
 
3.  
Ministries/Divisions are therefore, requested to kindly consider the above 
viewpoint, and, where practicable, take action in accordance with the procedure laid down in 
para 1 of Establishment Division‘s Office Memorandum No. 4/l/72-D.IV, dated the  
3rd February, 1972. 
 
4.  
The clipping from the ―Letters to the Editors‖ columns will, as usual, be 
supplied to the government departments/agencies concerned by the Press Information 
Department. 
 [Authority.- Information and Broadcasting Division‘s O.M. No. 1(18)/72-P.III, dated 16-5-1972]. 

Page - 788             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
 
11.1 Approaches to Ministers, M.N.As. etc.  
for Purchase or Sale of Property 
 
It has come to government‘s notice that government servants make approaches 
through Ministers, Chief Ministers, M.N.As. and M.P.As. or other means for issue of permit 
to buy transportation vehicles or other imported material and for purchase and sale of 
property. 
 
2. 
Such acts are not only in serious breach of Government Servants (Conduct) 
Rules, 1964 but also contrary to all tenets of propriety and are totally unbecoming of 
government servants.  Government has, therefore, taken serious note of such acts on the part 
of government servants.  In future, if any such case comes to notice, stern action will be 
taken against those involved.  The attention of the government servants, working in your 
Ministries/Divisions and Attached or Subordinate Offices and Autonomous Institutions may 
be drawn to the Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964, with direction to refrain from 
making such requests in future. 
[Authority.— Establishment Secretary‘s D.O. No.1/38/74-D.IV, dated 8-5-1974]. 
11.2 
Extraneous Influence by Government  
Servants in Respect of Service Matters 
 
It has been observed that the government servants, at times, attempt to bring 
extraneous influences in respect of service matters, such as posting, transfer, deputation etc. 
These acts are not only in breach of Government Servants (Conduct) rules, 1964 (as 
amended), but also constitute ‗Misconduct‘ in terms of rule 2(k) of the Government 
Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 1973, reproduced below:— 
 
  “„Misconduct‟ means conduct prejudicial to good order or service 
discipline or contrary to Government Servant (Conduct) Rules, 1964 or 
unbecoming of an officer and a gentleman and includes any act on the 
part of a Civil servant to assert or attempt to assert political or other 
exterior influence directly or indirectly to bear on the government or any 
government officer in respect of any matter relating to the appointment, 
promotion, transfer, punishment, retirement or other conditions of 
service of a Civil servant or having entered into plea bargain under any 
law for the time being in force and has returned the assets or gains 
acquired through corruption or corrupt practices, voluntarily.” 
 
2. 
 The civil servants are, therefore, advised, in their own interest, to scrupulo-
usly observe the provisions contained in the Government Servants Conduct 1964 and 
discipline rules. In future, if any civil servant attempts to bring extraneous influence in 
respect of his posting, transfer, deputation, etc., a note to this effect will be placed in his CR 
dossier, unless of course, proposals on these matters are made by the Ministries/Divisions/ 
Departments themselves formally to the Establishment Division. 
[Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s D.O. Letter No. 5/4/82-DI, dated 28-4-1982]. 
                         
 Now Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules, 2020. 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 789 
 
 
 
11.3 
Measures to Curb Extraneous Influences by 
Government Servants in Service Matters 
 
It has been observed there is an increasing trend among government servants to 
bring extraneous influences in service matters such as postings and transfers, promotions, 
etc. Apart from that in terms of rule 19 of the Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 
1964, read with sub-rule (k) of rule 2 of the Government Servants (Efficiency and 
Discipline) Rule, 1973, such acts constitute ‗misconduct‘, they have an adverse effect on 
the overall discipline and working efficiency of the concerned set ups. 
 
2. 
 In order to curb these practices, the Establishment Division has been 
circulating instructions reminding the government servants of the provisions under the 
rules and emphasizing the need to refrain from bringing in extraneous influences in 
service matters, in the then Adviser to the Prime Minister for Establishment‘s d.o. letter 
No. 57-27/86-E.II, dated 25th May, 1989, and the then Establishment Secretary‘s d.o. 
letter of even number dated 27th May, 1990. Despite clear position under the rules and 
issuing instructions and reminders on the subject, the instances of misconduct on the part 
of the defaulting government servants continue to come to notice. 
 
3. 
It has accordingly been decided that all the competent authorities would 
bring, immediately, to the notice of the Prime Minister‘s Office cases of the defaulting 
civil/government servants whenever extraneous pressures are brought to bear upon the 
normal channels of discipline, for seeking orders to initiate disciplinary proceedings on 
case to case basis, through the Establishment Division. 
[Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s D.O. letter No.5/4/82-D.I, dated 5-7-1995]. 
 
11.4 
Steps to Curb Extraneous Influences 
 
In order to curb the general tendency among the civil/government servants to use 
extraneous influence in contravention of rules 19 and 29 of the Government Servants 
(Conduct) Rules, 1964, the present government has decided to take effective steps on the 
subject. This includes suspension of any civil/government servant accused of the said 
contravention followed by expeditious E&D proceedings. 
 
2. 
It is accordingly requested that, henceforth, all cases of contravention of 
the said rules must be dealt with by placing the defaulter under suspension, in the first 
instance, with the approval of the competent authority concerned. It may be ensured that 
this action is taken without loss of time. 
 
3. 
 It is further requested that copies of suspension orders and, in due course, 
the final orders in such E&D proceedings, may also be forwarded to Establishment 
Division. 
[Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s d.o. letter No.5/4/82-D.I, dated 7-11-1996]. 
                         
 Now Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules, 2020. 

Page - 790             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
 
11.5 
Evidence Before Committee  
of the National Assembly 
 
Under rules 114 and 179 of the Rules of Procedure of the National Assembly of 
Pakistan, the Committees of the Assembly have the power, inter alia, to summon and 
examine any government servant and to require the production of any official record. As the 
government servant, who may be thus summoned or directed by a Committee would, in the 
matter of giving evidence before the Committees, be also subjected to the restrains provided 
for in rule 23 of the Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964 , a question has arisen as 
to whether a government servant can, in the course of his examination by any such 
Committee, decline to disclose any information or to produce any document which he thinks 
it would not be in the interest of the defence, the security or the external relations of Pakistan 
or in the public interest generally to disclose or produce.  The matter has been considered 
carefully and it has been decided that in such cases, the government servant concerned 
should claim privilege and politely decline to disclose such information or produce such 
document on grounds of public interest. 
[Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No. 1/1/64-F.I./DII, dated 14-1-1965]. 
  
11.6 Clarification of Application of Instructions  
Regarding Radio Broadcasts to Employees  
of Autonomous Bodies 
 
A reference is invited to the Ministry of Communications O.M. No. KP-2(20)/61, 
dated the 20th March, 1962 (Annex). It is stated that the instructions contained in this 
Division‘s O.M. No. 18(1)/48-B, dated the 15th December, 1950 apply to all persons in the 
civil service of Pakistan, whether for the time being on foreign service or not, to whom the 
Government Servants Conduct Rules also apply. 
 
2. 
It has been held by the Cabinet Secretariat (Establishment Division) in 
consultation with the Ministry of Law that the employees of autonomous and 
semi-autonomous bodies, like the Port Trust, P.I.D.C., Pakistan Council of Scientific and 
Industrial Research etc. except the government servants who may be on deputation to those 
bodies cannot be regarded to be in the civil service of Pakistan, and, therefore, they do not 
come under the purview of the Government Servants Conduct Rules. 
 
3. 
In view of the above position, the heads of autonomous and semi- 
autonomous bodies do not come within the fold of the orders contained in this Division‘s 
O.M referred to above. 
[Authority.- M/o Information & Broadcasting O.M. No.1(18)/62, dated 10-7-1962]. 
(ANNEX) 
 
[Copy of Ministry of Communications O.M. No., KP-2(20)/61, dated the 
20th March, 1962]. 
 
Reference Information and Broadcasting Division‘s Office Memorandum No.13 
(1)/48-B, dated the 15th December, 1950 regarding broadcast talks by government servants. 
A question has arisen whether instructions laid down therein are also applicable to the heads 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 791 
 
 
of autonomous, semi-autonomous bodies like the Port Trust etc. and if the heads of such 
institutions are asked to broadcast talks, their cases should come to the administrative 
Ministry concerned for grant of permission.  Since mention has been made only of 
government servants, it is presumed, they do not come into the picture.  However, the 
Ministry of National Reconstruction and Information are requested to kindly clarify the 
above points for guidance. 
 
12.1 Taking Part in Politics- Bar against  
Supporting Student Agitations 
 
Attention is invited to rule 23 of the Government Servants Conduct Rules, 
according to which a government servant shall not permit any person dependent on him or 
under his care or control, to take part in, or in any way assist any movement or activity 
which is, or tends directly or indirectly to be subversive of government as by law 
established in Pakistan. Under the same rule, a government servant shall be deemed to 
have permitted a person to take part in, or assisted a movement or activity, if he has not 
taken every possible precaution, and done everything in his power to prevent such person 
so acting.  In view of this, the conduct of government servants who may, consciously or 
unconsciously, support the student agitators and have sympathies with them would attract 
the provision of rule 23** of the Government Servants Conduct Rules. 
 
2.  
It is, therefore, requested that the above rule may be brought to the notice 
of all government servants and it may also be emphasized that a breach of this rule will 
make them liable to proceeded against under the Government Servants (Efficiency and 
Discipline) Rules. 
[Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.4/23/62-D.II, dated 19-10-1962]. 
 
12.2 
Action to be Taken Against Government Servants 
Found Indulging in Politics/Subversive Activities 
 
Instructions have been issued from time to time bringing to the notice of the 
government servants, rules under which their participation and the activities of political 
organizations is prohibited. In the context of the present situation it is necessary to bring the 
provisions of the relevant law/rules to the notice of all government servants for their guidance. 
 
2.  
Action against the defaulting government servants can be taken under the 
following law/rules:— 
 
(i) 
The Pakistan Essential Services (Maintenance) Act, 1952. 
 
(ii) 
The Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964. 
 
(iii) The @Government Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules. 
 
 
(a) 
Pakistan Essential Services (Maintenance) Act, 1952.— If a 
                         
 Now Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 
 Rule 24 of the Govt. Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964 . 
 Refers to Government Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 1960.  
@ Now Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules,2020. 

Page - 792             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
government servant, whose employment has been declared essential 
under rule 3 of the Pakistan Essential Services (Maintenance) Act, 1952, 
disobeys a lawful order or abandons work without reasonable excuse or 
departs from any area-specified in an order of a competent authority, he 
can be prosecuted under the Act and punished with imprisonment upto 
one year and with fine. 
 
 
(b) 
Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964.— Rule 24 of the 
Government Servants (Conduct) Rules 1964 prohibits government 
servants from taking part in, subscribing in aid of, or assisting in any way 
any political movement in Pakistan, or relating to the affairs of Pakistan, 
government servants are thus debarred from joining any political party. A 
defaulting government servant may be proceeded against under the 
Government Servants (Conduct) Rules 1964 on the charge of 
misconduct. 
 
 
(c) 
Government Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules.— A government 
servant can be proceeded against if he is guilty of misconduct or is found 
to be engaged in subversive activities independently or in association 
with others under rule 3 of the said rules. For subversive activities, the 
penalty can be compulsory retirement, removal or dismissal from service. 
[Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.3/I/69-D.II, dated 19-2-1969]. 
12.3 
Bar against Discussing Politics in  
Offices, Clubs, Restaurants and  
Public Places 
 
Attention is drawn to rule 24 of the Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964 
which prohibits government servants from taking part in politics and elections.  The rule is 
reproduced below:- 
 
―Rule 24 Taking part in politics and elections:- 
 ―(1)  No Government servant shall take part in, subscribe in aid of or assist in any 
way, any political movement in Pakistan or relating to the affairs of Pakistan. 
―(2) No Government servant shall permit any person dependent on him for 
maintenance or under his care or control to take part in, or in any way assist, 
any movement or activity which is, or tends directly or indirectly to be, 
subversive of Government as by law established in Pakistan. 
―(3) No Government servant shall canvass or otherwise interfere or use his 
influence in connection with or take part in any election to a legislative body, 
whether in Pakistan or elsewhere: 
 
 
 
 
Provided that a Government servant who is qualified to vote at such 
election may exercise his right to vote; but if he does so, he shall give no 
indication of the manner in which he proposes to vote or has voted. 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 793 
 
 
 
―(4)  No Government servant shall allow any member of his family dependent on 
him to indulge in any political activity, including forming a political 
association and being its member, or to act in a manner in which he himself is 
not permitted by sub-rule (3) to act. 
 
―(5) 
A government servant who issues an address to electors or in any other 
manner publicly announces himself or allows himself to be publicly 
announced as a candidate or prospective candidate for election to a 
legislative body shall be deemed for the purpose of sub-rule (3) to take part 
in an election to such body. 
 
―(6) 
The provisions of sub-rules (3) and (5) shall, so far as may be, apply to 
elections to local authorities or bodies, save in respect of Government 
servants required or permitted by or under any law, or order of the 
Government for the time being in force to be candidates at such elections. 
 
―(7) 
If any question arises whether any movement or activity falls within the 
scope of this rule, the decision of the Government thereon shall be final‖. 
 
2. 
It is clarified that under sub-rule (7) of the above rule, the government 
servant is prohibited from discussing politics in offices, clubs, restaurants and other public 
places. Although a government servant is not debarred from voting at the elections, he 
cannot propagate his political views openly in a manner that might influence the opinions of 
others or indicate the trends of his own political thinking. He cannot also attend or 
participate in functions of political leaders, political rallies, processions etc. Nor can he 
develop associations which would get him involved directly or indirectly in a realm that is 
essentially political. 
 
3. 
 It is requested that these instructions should be brought to the notice of the 
all government servants for strict compliance. The government servants should be warned 
that any breach of these instructions will be dealt with severely. 
[Authority.- Estt. Secretary‘s D.O. letter No. 5/2/70-DIV, dated 19-7-1973]. 
 
13.1 Supply of Copies of Government Orders/ 
 
Instructions to the Employees Associations 
 
Copies of general orders of non-confidential nature, which embody decisions of the 
government affecting a particular class of employees, may, at the discretion of the authorities 
which accord recognition, be supplied to the recognized associations, through the 
Establishment Division. 
 
2.  
The matter has been examined in the Establishment Division.  Now the 
government orders of non-confidential nature, relating to service matters, are available in the 
form of books. For instance, administrative or establishment instructions have been 
compiled in ―Establishment Manual‖, ―Estacode‖ etc., and financial orders in the 
―Compilations‖ etc. These books or relevant instructions from those publications, can be had 
by the associations, individually. The orders which may not be available in those 
publications and may not be of confidential nature, can be obtained by the associations from 
the Ministry/Division concerned on formal or informal request. 
                         
Subs. vide Estt. Div.‘s Notification No. SRO 993(1)/776, dated 30.9.1976. 

Page - 794             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
 
3. 
The instructions regarding the supply of copies to the associations, as 
contained in the above-quoted and other orders, on the subject, are therefore, hereby 
withdrawn. 
 
4.  
Ministries/Divisions are requested to bring these orders to the notice of the 
office-bearers of the associations, who may be employed with them or with their 
Attached/Subordinate Organizations. 
[Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No. 16/l/82-D.5, dated 20-6-1982]. 
13.2 
Continuation of Service Association Other  
Than Those of Services Regularly Constituted 
 
Associations of employees other than those belonging to the regularly constituted 
Services, may continue to function till further orders. 
[Authority.- Estt. Secretary‘s D.O. letter No.16/17/73-F.I, dated 30-1-1974]. 
Sl.No.14 
Functioning of Service Associations 
 
Following decisions of the government were circulated to all Ministries/Offices 
of the Federal Government vide Establishment Division Office Memoranda of even 
number, dated the 7th May, 1974 and 11th June, 1974 , that:— 
(i) 
elections for the service associations may not be allowed to be held during 
office hours, 
(ii) 
victory celebrations in such elections may not be allowed within the office 
premises during the office hours, and 
(iii) meetings of service associations may not be held in the office premises 
during office hours. 
 
2. 
 It has come to the notice of Establishment Division that these instructions 
are not being followed strictly. In certain cases, even the general body meetings of service 
associations were planned to be held in the office premises during office hours, in which 
the Federal Ministers had been invited to preside over the functions. 
 
3.  
The orders referred to in para 1 above were issued with a view to ensuring 
that the government work does not suffer due to association activities. Heads of 
Ministries/Offices of the Federal Government are once again requested kindly to ensure 
that service associations of the employees under their administrative control do not hold 
functions in the office premises during office hours. 
[Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No.16/4/74-F.I, dated 1-4-1976]. 
                         
Add ―and Groups‖. 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 795 
 
 
 
15.1 Permission to Representatives of Service  
Associations to Attend Various Meetings  
 
It is stated that representatives of service associations have informed that they are 
facing difficulties to attend the meetings during office hours convened by the Staff Welfare 
Organization. 
 
2. 
It has been decided with the approval of Establishment Secretary that the 
representatives of service associations may be permitted to attend meeting of Board of 
Trustees, Federal Employees Benevolent Fund and Group Insurance as and when held, 
during office hours, subject to production of notice from the organization. 
 
3. 
It is, therefore, requested that representatives of the service associations may 
kindly be allowed to attend the above meetings, which are officially arranged and the agenda 
of the meeting is also provided to the Ministries/Divisions. The timings should be invariably 
laid down in the orders of the meeting to ensure that the office bearers after the meeting 
report back for duties, within the reasonable time. 
[Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.16/3/87-D-3, dated 7-4-1987]. 
  
15.2 Grant of Interview to the Office  
Bearers of the Association 
 
  It is stated that Pakistan BS 1 & 2 Employees‘ Association have stated that the 
officers in the Ministries/Divisions do not give time for interview to discuss the problem of 
the employees.  Ministries/ Divisions are requested that the request of office bearers of BS 1 
& 2 Employees‘ Association for interview regarding their collective and genuine problems 
may be accepted. 
[Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.16/5/88-D.5, dated 20-3-1988]. 
15.3 
Bar Against Public Criticism of Government  
Action by Associations etc. 
 
Public criticism of the government action by a civil servant or a body of civil 
servants constitutes misconduct under the Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964 and 
calls for disciplinary action. 
 
2.  
The associations of civil servants are not like the ordinary trade unions or 
bodies of workers employed in the industrial or commercial sector.  Civil servants are 
allowed to form associations under a strict code which allows ventilation of their legitimate 
grievances only through the prescribed channel.  The publicity to the press is not allowed. 
[Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s D.O. No.1471/PS/ES/76, dated 23-6-1967]. 
 
15.4 
Demands of Service Associations 
 
It has come to the notice of Establishment Division that un-recognized/ un-
registered service associations are in existence with whom some of the Ministries/ Divisions 

Page - 796             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
etc. are having discussions. It is hereby advised that the issues raised registered/ recognized 
associations may only be considered to ensure elimination of un-registered/un-recognized 
associations. 
 [Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No.16/19/88-D.II, dated 07-11-2006]. 
 
16.1 Channel of Communication Between Recognized 
Service Associations and Government 
 
According to the rules governing recognition of associations of civil servants, the 
recognized associations are required to submit their representations to government 
through the office specifically designated for the purpose. The recognition of an 
association which disregards the rules and adopts other methods of representation is apt to 
be withdrawn. 
 
2. 
Instances have come to the notice of Establishment Division where 
recognized associations have addressed their representations to authorities, other than 
those to whom such representations should have been addressed and have circulated 
copies of the representations to various authorities. This is a violation of the condition of 
recognition of associations. 
 
3. 
In so far as associations recognized by the Establishment Division are 
concerned, Deputy Secretary, Establishment Division was designated as the officer to 
whom representations should be addressed. Other Ministries and Divisions were 
requested to similarly designate their officers for the purpose. The matter has been further 
examined and it has been decided that more senior officers should be designated for the 
purpose which should not be lower than Joint Secretary in the case of 
Ministries/Divisions and the Head of Department, or his Deputy, in the case of Attached 
and Subordinate Offices. 
 
4.  
The Ministries/Divisions are requested to designate appropriate officers 
for the purpose of receiving representations and to notify the same to the associations 
whose recognition is still valid in terms of Establishment Division D.O. letter No. 
16/17/73-F.I., dated the 30th January, 1974. The Establishment Division may please be 
informed of such associations and the officers designated to receive representations from 
the associations. 
 
5. 
While communicating the designation etc. of the revised designated 
officers, the association should be warned that in case representations are addressed by 
the associations to the officer/authority other than the officer designated for the purpose, 
its recognition is apt to be withdrawn by government. 
[Authority.— Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.1814/75-F.II, dated 28-3-1977]. 
 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 797 
 
 
16.2 
Approaching Foreign Missions and Aid-Giving  
Agencies by Officers to Secure Invitation to  
Visit a Foreign Country or to Elicit Offers 
of Training Facilities 
 
It has come to Cabinet‘s notice that certain officers of the Central or Provincial 
Governments have approached foreign governments or their representatives in Pakistan 
for the grant to them of scholarships, fellowships or other facilities to visit foreign 
countries, etc., and have finalized the arrangements without obtaining prior approval or 
have taken these negotiations and arrangements to a stage where refusal by the 
Government of Pakistan to grant the necessary permission to the officer concerned would 
embarrass the government as well as the officer. In order to prevent a repetition of such 
cases, it is considered necessary that no officer should make such approaches in future 
without the prior approval of the government under which he is employed or make any 
commitment, whatsoever, without obtaining the prior permission of government. 
[Authority.- Cabinet Division‘s D.O. letter No. 54(38)-53-Cord, dated 25 and 26-8-1953]. 
 
17.1 Correspondence with Foreign Missions 
 
Instances have come to notice in which foreign missions have offered 
scholarships/ fellowships to officers employed under the Government of Pakistan and the 
Provincial Governments direct for purposes of their training abroad. Such offers were 
accepted by officers and Ministries/Governments when approached subsequently, 
concurred in the arrangements. 
 
2.  
As the Ministry of Finance, etc., are aware, the channel of communication 
between the *Central and Provincial Governments and the foreign missions in Pakistan is 
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs except in such cases where certain Ministries/Departments 
have been allowed to correspond direct with foreign missions on purely routine or 
technical matters not involving any question of policy. The Economic Affairs Division 
have been authorized by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to carry on correspondence direct 
with the foreign missions in matters relating to the technical assistance schemes. All 
Ministries/Divisions are, therefore, requested to route their correspondence with foreign 
missions on this subject through that Division. 
 
3. 
In view of the above, the Ministry of Finance, etc., are requested to issue 
instructions that no officer working under them should correspond with foreign missions 
in Pakistan direct and that no offer of fellowship/scholarship received from any foreign 
mission or any foreign government otherwise than through the Economic Affairs Division 
should be accepted by them nor should any Ministry concur in the acceptance of such an 
offer except with the concurrence of the Economic Affairs Division. 
[Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No. 1/17/53-SE.II, dated 9-10-1953]. 
                         
 Federal. 

Page - 798             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
17.2 
Bar Against Security Scholarships 
and Invitation to Visit Abroad 
 
1. 
…………….Omitted……………….. 
 
2. Under the existing detailed instructions, all Secretaries to the Federal 
Government and Chief Secretaries of Provincial Governments are required to ensure that 
under no circumstances should any scholarships or invitations for visits abroad be 
accepted from foreign missions/governments when these are offered directly to 
individuals. Any direct offer is required to be politely declined with the suggestion that 
the offer be made through the Foreign Office. In the event of direct invitation/offer being 
received by any individual or official from a foreign government through the post, it has 
to be transmitted to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for processing. 
 
3.  
These procedures have been laid down in accordance with the 
well-established international rules in diplomatic theory and practice governing the 
conduct of a sending state and its representatives in a receiving state. Extension of invitations 
by a sending state to the citizens of the receiving state and their acceptance by the latter fall 
within the purview of Article 41 (para 2) of the Vienna Convention, as follows:— 
 
―All official business with the receiving state entrusted to the Mission by 
the sending state shall be conducted with or through the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs of the receiving state or such other Ministry as may be agreed.‖ 
 
4.  
It is noted with regret, however, that contrary to the laid-down instructions, 
there have been several instances where direct invitations were extended by certain 
foreign governments/missions to Pakistan nationals to visit their countries or to 
participate in conferences and seminars there. Certain foreign missions in Pakistan have 
also been seeking to establish direct contacts with various local bodies, institutions and 
opposition elements. 
 
5.  
Pursuant to a recent decision taken by the Federal Cabinet, it is reiterated 
once again that the laid-down procedure for contacts with foreign diplomatic missions, 
acceptance of invitations, gifts and scholarships etc., from foreign governments should be 
strictly enforced without any exception. In the case of private individuals and politicians 
receiving direct invitations, the State Bank of Pakistan and other agencies concerned 
should adopt effective measures to stop their departure from the country on un-
authorizedly-sponsored visits abroad. The system of prior clearance from the Interior 
Division and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs should be strictly followed in such cases. 
[Authority.— Paras 2-5 of Estt. Secretary‘s D.O. letter No.104/30/76-Min, dated 23-6-1976]. 
 
18.1 Fraternisation Between Government Servants  
and the Foreign Missions in Pakistan 
 
Instructions have been issued, from time to time, explaining the parameters within 
which a government servant could cultivate contacts with the personnel of the foreign 
missions in the country. It has, however, come to the notice of the government that despite 
clear orders there exists a tendency amongst government officials to approach the foreign 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 799 
 
 
missions, directly or indirectly, for personal favours as well as consular facilities. Such acts, 
obviously are a clear violation of rule 30 of the Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964 
and instructions issued thereunder. 
 
2. 
The government has taken a serious view of the above tendency amongst 
government servants and it has, therefore, become imperative to circulate the government 
instructions on the subject once again for strict compliance by the government servants:— 
 
(1) 
Government servants should exercise great caution and restraint in the matter 
of social contacts with the members of foreign mission in Pakistan and, inter-
alia, abstain from extending invitations to them for private lunches/dinners at 
their residence etc. 
 
(2) 
Officials of the level of Deputy Secretary and below should not receive the 
officials of the foreign missions, except with the express permission of the 
Secretary. 
 
(3) 
Government servants are also prohibited from contacting, or making direct 
approaches, to the foreign missions in Pakistan, in connection with their 
private business. All such approaches should be made through proper 
channel (i.e. the Ministry of Foreign Affairs). 
 
(4) 
Invitations extended by the foreign missions on the occasions of their 
national days to the officers below the status of Joint Secretaries, may be 
accepted only after obtaining permission from the Secretary. 
 
(5) 
The participation of officers below the status of Joint Secretary in the private 
functions, arranged by the foreign diplomats, should generally be 
discouraged. Joint Secretaries and officers of equivalent status will, however, 
do so with the prior approval of the Secretary. 
 
(6) 
Repeated and frequent attendance, by the officers, at private functions held 
by the same foreign diplomat, must be avoided. 
 
(7) 
As a general rules, only those officers who come into official contact with the 
foreign diplomat concerned, should accept his invitation. 
 
3. 
Compliance of the above instructions may be ensured, at all levels, so that no 
one approaches, directly or indirectly, any foreign missions in Pakistan or any foreign aid-
giving agency, for favours and any violation of the rules, as well as the instructions issued on 
the subject from time to time, will be dealt with severely under the conduct and discipline 
rules. 
[Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s D.O. letter No.6/17/72-DA/D-IV, dated 14-4-1990]. 
 
18.2 
Indulging in Critical Remarks Against Ministers 
 
All government servants should be warned that they should not indulge in critical 
remarks against their own Ministers or other Ministers. This is against discipline or good 
conduct, and should be dealt with as such. 
[Authority. - Estt. Secretary‘s D.O. letter No.4/20/61-D.II, dated 23-9-1961]. 

Page - 800             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
 
19.1 Government Servants (Marriage with  
Foreign Nationals) Rules, 1962 
 
In exercise of the powers conferred by clause (2) of Article 178  of the  
Constitution, the  President  is  pleased  to  make  the following rules, namely:- 
 
1. 
Short title, application and commencement.— (1) These rules may be 
called the Government Servants (Marriage with Foreign Nationals) Rules, 1962. 
 
(2)  They shall apply to every person who is a member of an All-Pakistan 
Service or who is serving in a civil capacity in connection with the affairs of the Central* 
Government, but shall not apply to any person who is employed on contract. 
 
(3)  They shall come into force at once. 
 
2.  
Definitions.— In these rules, unless there is anything repugnant in the 
subject or context:- 
 
(a) 
―foreign national‖ means a person who is not a citizen of Pakistan; 
 
(b) 
―government servant‖ means a person in the service of Pakistan to whom 
these rules apply whether such person is, for the time being, on ‗foreign 
service‘** or not; 
 
(c) 
―marriage‖ means matrimonial relationship entered into in accordance with 
any law for the time being in force or any religious rites or ceremonies, and 
its grammatical variations and cognate expressions shall be construed 
accordingly; 
 
(d) 
―misconduct‖ has the same meaning as in the Government Servants 
(Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 1960. 
 
―3.  Marriage with Foreign nationals prohibited.-(1) Subject to the provisions 
of sub-rule (2), a government servant who marries or promises to marry a foreign national 
shall be guilty of misconduct and render himself liable to any of the major penalties under 
the ***Government Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 1973. 
 
(2)  A government servant, may with the prior permission of the 
@Establishment Division marry or promise to marry a @@[foreign national of any country 
recognized by Federal Government]. 
                         
* Federal. 
** deputation.  
 Now Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules, 2020. 
@Subs. vide Establishment Division‘s S.R.O No. 999(I)/2019 dated  05-09-2019. 
@@ Subs. vide Estt. Div.‘s Notification No. S.R.O 1083(I)/2010 dated 12-11-2010. 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 801 
 
 
 
(3)  The grant of permission under sub-rule (2) shall be at the discretion of the 
Establishment Division, and may be subject to such conditions, if any, as it may specify.‖ 
 
4.  
Supersession of previous rules, notifications, etc.-These rules shall 
supersede all previous rules, notifications and instructions relating to the conditions of 
marriage of a government servant.  
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s Notification No. S.R.O. 341 (K)/63 (4)/103/5,  
dated 29-4-1963 as amended upto 13-9-1965]. 
Note.— Officials who propose to marry Indian nationals should submit applications on the form 
prescribed vide Establishment Division O.M.No. 4/103/59-D-II, dated the 11th June, 1963. 
 
 
                         
Subs. vide Establishment Division‘s S.R.O No. 999(I)/2019 dated 05-09-2019. 

Page - 802             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
NEW PROFORMA FOR MARRIAGE WITH A FOREIGN NATIONAL 
Name of Ministry/Division/Department:_____________________ 
1. 
Name, Designation and Department in which the official is employed: 
2. 
Particulars of the lady whom the applicant wishes to marry: 
(a) 
Name: 
(b) 
Father‘s Name: 
(c) 
Age: 
(d) 
Qualification: 
(e) 
Profession: 
(f) 
Full Address: 
3. 
Political affiliation of the lady and her family, if any. 
4. 
Family commitments and relationship, if any. 
5. 
Whether the lady would come to Pakistan to marry, or the official proposes to go to 
________________________? 
6. 
If the official wishes to go to *_________________ why cannot the lady come over 
to Pakistan to get married? 
7. 
Whether the lady has visited Pakistan previously and if so, on what date and for 
what purpose? With whom and where did she stay. 
8. 
Near relations of the lady in *___________________ if employed, where and in 
what status. 
9. 
Relations of the lady in Pakistan with address and profession. 
10. Work on which the official is engaged at present stating the nature of work secret or 
ordinary. 
11. Work on which the official has been engaged during the last two years stating the 
nature of work secret or ordinary.  
12. (a)  Number of visits made to*____________ by the applicant with approximate 
date and purpose of visit in each cases. 
 
(b)  Where and with whom did he stay in *____________ 
 
(c) 
 Passport number with date and place of issue. 
13. Place visited in *____________________________ 
14. Proof, if any, in support of the statement made at Serial No.4. 
15. Present Pakistani address of the Government Servant 
Date:                                               Signature________________ 
                                                        Designation______________ 
Certificate to be recorded by Secretary/Joint Secretary/Incharge/Deputy Secretary/Head 
of the Department. 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 803 
 
 
It is certified that the information given above represents true position in respect of 
____________________________ according to his own statement. Information relating 
to items No.10, 11 and12 has been verified from the official record.  
Place:                                Signature of the recommending officer 
Date                                    Designation___________________ 
“Note: *____________ stand for name of the foreign Country.” 
 
19.2 
Marriage or Promise of Marriage with  
Foreign Nationals (Except Indian) to  
be Considered ‗Misconduct‘ 
 
Attention is invited to the Government Servants (Marriage with Foreign Nationals) 
Rules, 1962, whereunder marriage or promise of marriage with foreign nationals, except 
those of India, by any government servant is not permitted and contravention of these 
rules is considered as misconduct rendering the government servants found guilty, liable 
to be removed from service.  Marriage or promise thereof with the citizens of India is 
possible only with prior permission of the government. 
 
2. 
It has come to notice that in some cases, the government servants 
concerned were not fully aware of these rules. Ministries/Divisions are, therefore, 
requested to draw attention of their officers to the provisions of these rules and advise 
their strict observance. The attention of all those who enter service in future may also be 
specifically drawn to these rules at the time of assumption of duties. 
 
3. 
There is also need for forewarning the officers particularly the young at the 
time of their going abroad. The officers on such occasions may be granted interviews by 
Secretaries or heads of departments under whom they work in which the risk involved in 
violating the marriage rules may be explained. 
[Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No. 3/13/68-D.II, dated 14-6-1968]. 
19.3 
Observance of Government Servants (Marriage  
with Foreign Nationals) Rules, 1962 and Guidelines 
 
The competent authority in the Chief Executive Secretariat has directed that all 
government servants be directed to:— 
(i) 
scrupulously observe the requirements of the Government Servants 
(Marriage with Foreign Nationals) Rules, 1962 and policy guidelines 
issued from time to time; and 
(ii) 
abstain from applying for or acquiring green cards/foreign nationality etc. 
in contravention of the conduct and discipline laws/rules etc. 
[Authority: Estt. Div.‘s Circular No. 2/7/81-D4/D3, dated 15th June, 2000] 
                         
Now Prime Minister‘s Office.  

Page - 804             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
19.4 
Bar Against Making Requests for  
‗Ex-Post Facto‘ Approval for Marriages  
with Foreign Nationals 
 
Lately, there has been an increase in requests of ex-post facto approval for 
marriages with foreign nationals in relaxation of the above rules. Invariably, the excuse 
for having contracted such marriages by the government servants is ignorance of the rules. 
 
2.   
The competent authority has taken serious notice of this tendency and has 
been pleased to direct that all Ministries/ Divisions/ Departments be asked to disseminate 
the rule position to government servants for strict compliance. The competent authority has 
further directed that in future no more ex-post facto permission will be granted in such cases. 
[Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No.2/7/81-D.IV/D.3, dated 26-9-1988]. 
 
19.5 
Prohibition of Wasteful  
Expenditure on Marriages 
 
The Cabinet in its meeting held on 11.2.1997, has, inter alia, decided that the 
government functionaries henceforth should not attend any such marriage functions which 
violate the provisions of the Marriages (Prohibition of Wasteful Expenses) Act, 1997 and use 
discretion in attending marriage functions other than those of close family and personal friends. 
 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s letter No.2/3/97-D.3, dated 18-6-1997]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 805 
 
 
II.   EFFICIENCY AND DISCIPLINE 
 
20.1 
Civil Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 2020 
 
In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of section 25(1) of the 
Civil Servants Act,1973 (LXXI of 1973), read with Notification No. S.R.O No. 
120(I)/1998, dated the 27th day of February 1998, the Prime Minister is pleased to make 
the following rules, namely:— 
 
1. 
Short title, commencement and application.— (1) These rules shall be 
called the Civil Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules,2020. 
 
(2) 
These shall come into force at once and shall apply to every Civil Servant.  
 
2. 
Definitions.—(1) 
In these rules, unless there is anything repugnant in 
the subject or context requires otherwise,— 
(a) 
―Act‖ means Civil Servants Act,1973 (Act No. LLXI of 1973); 
(b) 
―accused‖ means a civil servant against whom action is initiated under 
these rules; 
(c) 
―authority‖ means the appointing authority as prescribed in rule 6 of the 
Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules,1973: 
 
Provided that where proceedings under these rules are to be initiated 
against two or more civil servants jointly, the authority in relation to 
senior most civil servant in rank shall be the authority in respect of all the 
accused: 
 
Provided further that in all such cases where the President or the 
Prime Minister is the authority, all functions of the authority under these 
rules, except approval of initiating the disciplinary proceedings, 
appointment of a hearing officer and final decision on the report of 
inquiry officer or the inquiry committee, shall be performed by the 
respective cadre administrator.  
(d) 
―appellate authority‖ means the appellate authority as defined in the Civil 
Servants (Appeal) Rules,1977;  
(e) 
―charges‖ means allegations framed against the accused relating to the 
acts of omission or commission cognizable under these rules; 
(f) 
―Government‖ means the Federal Government, Provincial Governments, 
Government of Azad Jammu and Kashmir or Government of Gilgit-Baltistan, 
as the case may be. 
(g) 
―hearing officer‖ means an officer, as far as possible senior in rank to the 
accused, appointed by the authority to afford an opportunity of personal 
hearing to the accused on behalf of the authority concerned; 

Page - 806             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
(h) 
―inefficiency‖ in relation to the discharge of duties of a civil servant 
means the failure to efficiently perform functions assigned to him; 
(i) 
―inquiry committee‖ means a committee consisting of two or more 
officers, headed by a convener, as may be appointed by the authority to 
inquire into charges of the accused under these rules; 
(j) 
―inquiry officer‖ means an officer appointed by the authority to inquire 
into charges of the accused under these rules; 
(k) 
―misconduct‖ means conduct prejudicial to good order or service 
discipline or contrary to Government Servants (Conduct) Rules,1964 or 
unbecoming of an officer and, a gentlemen and includes any act on the 
part of a civil servant to assert or attempt to assert political or other 
exterior influence directly or indirectly to bear on the Government or any 
Government officer in respect of any matter relating to the appointment, 
promotion, transfer, punishment, retirement or other conditions of service 
of a civil servant, or having entered into plea bargain under any law for 
the time being in force and has returned the assets or gains acquired 
through corruption or corrupt practices, voluntarily; 
(l) 
―penalty‖ means a penalty as prescribed under these rules.  
 
(2) 
Words and expressions used but not defined herein shall have the same 
meanings as are assigned thereto in the Civil Servants Act,1973 (LXXI of 1973) and rules 
made thereunder or any other legal instrument, statutory order for the time being in force.  
 
3. 
Grounds for proceedings and penalty.— A civil servant shall be liable 
to be proceeded under these rules by the authority, if he is— 
(a) 
considered or reported to be inefficient or has ceased to be efficient; or  
(b) 
considered or reported to be guilty of misconduct; or  
(c) 
considered or reported to be corrupt because— 
(i) 
he or any of his dependents or any other person through him or on 
his behalf is in possession (for which he cannot reasonably account) 
of pecuniary resources or of property disproportionate to his known 
source of income; or  
(ii) 
he has assumed a style of living beyond his ostensible means;  
(d) 
engaged, or is reasonably suspected of being engaged, in subversive 
activities or is reasonably suspected of being associated with other 
engaged in subversive activities or is guilty of disclosure of official 
secrets to any un-authorized person.  
 
4. 
Penalties.—(1) The authority may, by an order, in writing showing 
reasons, impose one or more of the penalties, in accordance with these rules. 
(2) 
The following shall be various minor penalties, namely:—  

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 807 
 
 
(a) 
censure; 
(b) 
withholding of increment or increments for a specific period, subject 
to a maximum of three years without cumulative effect: 
 
 
Provided that the penalty of withholding of increment shall not 
be imposed upon a civil servant who has reached the maximum of 
his pay scale or will superannuate within the period of penalty;   
(c) 
reduction to a lower stage or stages, in pay scale, for a specific 
period, subject to a maximum of three stages without cumulative 
effect; and  
(d) 
withholding of promotion for a specific period, subject to a 
maximum of three years, otherwise than for unfitness for promotion in 
accordance with the rules or orders pertaining to the service or post: 
 
 
Provided that this period shall be counted from the date when 
a person junior to the accused is considered for promotion on regular 
basis for the first time: 
 
 
Provided further that penalty under this clause shall not be 
imposed upon a civil servant who has no further prospects of 
promotion or will superannuate during the period of the said penalty. 
 
(3) 
The following shall be various major penalties, namely:— 
(a) 
recovery of embezzled money from civil servants convicted of 
embezzlement, recovery as provided under financial rules, from pay 
or any other amount payable to the accused, the whole or a part of 
any pecuniary loss caused to the Government or the organization in 
which he was employed or posted. If the amount due from any such civil 
servant cannot be wholly recovered from the pay or any other amount 
payable to him, such amount shall be recovered under the law for the 
time being in force; 
(b) 
reduction to a lower post and pay scale from the substantive or 
regular post, for a specific period, subject to a maximum of three 
years: 
 
Provided that this penalty shall not be imposed upon the 
accused who is likely to be superannuated within the period of the 
penalty; 
(c) 
compulsory retirement; 
(d) 
removal from service; and  
(e) 
dismissal from service 
(4) 
The penalty of removal from service shall not but dismissal from service, 
under these rules, shall disqualify the civil servant for future employment of any kind 
under the Government.  

Page - 808             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
(5) 
Subject to any restraining order, passed by any court of competent 
jurisdiction, any proceedings under these rules shall not be discontinued merely on the 
grounds of the matter being sub-judice: 
Provided that where the holding of departmental inquiry during judicial custody is 
not possible or side by side with the criminal proceedings may have the effect of impeding 
the course of justice or of prejudicing the trial, the inquiry may be deferred by the authority 
till release on bail or termination of criminal proceedings as the case may be.  
3. 
Suspension and leave.— (1) The authority may place any civil servant 
under suspension or send him on leave, against whom proceedings are proposed to be 
initiated for an initial period not exceeding one hundred and twenty days at one time 
extendable in writing, by the authority for such period as it may deem appropriate or till 
conclusion of the proceedings, if in the opinion of the authority, suspension or sending civil 
servant on leave is necessary or expedient. If the period of suspension is not extended before 
the expiry of initial period of suspension, the suspension of such civil servant shall cease to 
have effect: 
 
Provided that a civil servant who has been charged for a criminal offence and is 
committed to prison shall be considered as under suspension from the date of his arrest 
without the formal approval of Authority. In case such a civil servant is not arrested or is 
released on bail the Authority may suspend him by specific order.  
 
(2) 
During suspension period the civil servant shall be entitled to his pay, 
allowance and other benefits in accordance with Fundamental Rule-53. 
 
(3) 
If a civil servant is sent on leave in pursuance of an order under sub rule(1), 
such period shall be treated as on duty.  
 
(4) 
In case a civil servant is absent from official duty during the proceedings, 
such period shall be treated as extra ordinary leave without pay.  
 
6. 
Initiation of proceedings.— Proceedings against the civil servant, in case 
where the authority decides that it is not necessary to hold an inquiry, shall be initiated from 
the date the accused is informed by an order in writing of the grounds of proceedings against 
him and where the authority decides to hold an inquiry against the accused, from the date of 
such order.  
 
7. 
Procedure where inquiry is dispensed with.— If the authority decides 
that it is not necessary to hold an inquiry against the accused, it shall 
(a) 
inform the accused, by an order in writing, of the grounds for proceedings 
against him, clearly specifying the charges therein, alongwith apportion-
ment of responsibility and penalty or penalties proposed to be imposed upon 
him; 
(b) 
give him a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the proposed 
action, which should not be less than ten days and more than fourteen 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 809 
 
 
days, from the receipt of the order or within such extended period, as the 
authority may allow; 
(c) 
on receipt of reply of the accused, within the stipulated period or after the 
expiry thereof, if no reply is received, on the basis of available record or 
facts of the case, as the case may be, determine whether the charge or 
charges have been proved against the accused or not: 
 
Provided that after receipt of reply to the show cause notice from 
the accused or in case where no reply is received the authority shall, 
except in such cases where the President or the Prime Minister is the 
authority, decide the case within a period of thirty days; 
(d) 
afford an opportunity of personal hearing, before passing any order of penalty 
under clause (f), if the charge or charges have been proved against him; 
(e) 
exonerate the accused, by an order in writing, if the charge or charges 
have not been proved against him; and 
(f) 
impose any one or more penalties, mentioned in rule 4, by an order in 
writing, if the charge or charges have been proved against the accused.  
 
8. 
Provision of record.— After initiation of order of inquiry the authority 
shall ensure that relevant record of the case and other related documents should be 
supplied to the inquiry officer or the inquiry committee, as the case may be, within seven 
days or within such an extended period which the authority may allow. 
 
9. 
Procedure to be followed by authority where inquiry is necessary.— 
(1) If the authority decides that it is necessary to hold an inquiry against the accused, it 
shall pass an order of inquiry, in writing. An inquiry order shall include— 
(a) 
subject to sub-rule (2) the appointment of an inquiry officer or inquiry 
committee, provided that the inquiry officer or the convener of the inquiry 
committee, as the case may, shall as far as possible, be of a rank senior to 
the accused and where two or more accused are proceeded against jointly, 
the inquiry officer or the convener of the inquiry committee shall, as far as 
possible, be of a rank senior to the senior most accused; 
(b) 
the grounds for proceedings, clearly specifying the charges alongwith 
apportionment of responsibility which shall be communicated to accused 
within fourteen days, from the date of initiation of proceedings;  
(c) 
appointment of the departmental representative by designation; and 
(d) 
direction to the accused to submit his written defense to the inquiry 
officers or convener of the inquiry committee, as the case may be, within 
reasonable time which shall not be less than ten and more than fourteen 
days from the date of receipt of order under clause (b) or within such an 
extended period as the authority may allow.  
(2) 
In cases where more than one civil servants are accused in one case, a 
single inquiry officer or an inquiry committee shall be appointed and the inquiry officer or 

Page - 810             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
convener of the inquiry committee so appointed shall, as far as possible, be of a rank 
senior to the senior most civil servant accused in the particular case.  
(3) 
The record of the case and the list of witnesses, if any, shall be 
communicated to the inquiry officer or the inquiry committee, as the case may be, 
alongwith the orders of inquiry.  
(4) 
In case where the inquiry officer or any of the members of the inquiry 
committee is required to be replaced for one reason or the other, the authority shall 
appoint another inquiry officer or the inquiry committee, as the case may be.  
10. 
Procedure to be followed by inquiry officer or inquiry committee.— 
(1) On receipt of reply of the accused or on expiry of the stipulated period, if no reply is 
received from the accused, the inquiry officer or the inquiry committee, as the case may 
be, shall inquire into the charge or charges or in defense of the accused, as may be 
considered necessary and where any witness is produced by one party, the other party 
shall be entitled to cross-examine such witness.  
(2) 
If the accused fails to furnish his reply within the stipulated period, the 
inquiry officer or the inquiry committee, as the case may be, shall proceed with the 
inquiry ex-parte.  
(3) 
The inquiry officer or the inquiry committee, as the case may be shall hear 
the case on day to day basis and no adjournment shall be given except for reasons to be 
recorded, in which case the adjournment shall not be of more than seven days.  
(4) 
Statements of witnesses shall be recorded in the presence of accused and 
departmental representative.  
(5) 
Where the inquiry officer or the inquiry committee, as the case may be, is 
satisfied that the accused is hampering or attempting to hamper the progress of the 
inquiry, he or it shall administer a warning and if thereafter he or it is satisfied that the 
accused is acting is disregard to the warning, he or it shall record a finding to that effect 
and proceed to complete the inquiry in such a manner as may be deemed expedient in the 
interest of justice.  
(6) 
If the accused absents himself from the inquiry on medical grounds, he 
shall be deemed to have hampered or attempted to hamper the progress of the inquiry, 
unless medical leave, applied for by him, is sanctioned by the authority on the 
recommendations of a registered authorized medical officer.  
(7) 
The inquiry officer or the inquiry committee, as the case may be, shall 
complete the inquiry within sixty days or within such an extended period which the 
authority may allow on the request of inquiry officer or Inquiry Committee, as the case 
may be, for reasons to be recorded and shall submit his or its report to the authority within 
seven days of the date of completion of inquiry. The inquiry report must contain clear 
findings as to whether the charge or charges have been proved or not proved and specific 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 811 
 
 
recommendations regarding exoneration or imposition of minor or major penalty or 
penalties upon the accused: 
Provided that the inquiry shall not be vitiated merely on the grounds of non-
observance of the time schedule for completion of the inquiry.  
11. 
Revision.— (1) Subject to sub-rule (2), the authority may call for the 
record of any case pending before the inquiry officer or inquiry committee, as the case 
may be, and pass such order in relation thereto as it may deem fit.   
(2) 
No order under sub-rule (1) shall be passed in respect of an accused 
unless the authority has informed him in writing of the grounds on which it is proposed to 
make the order and has been given an opportunity of showing cause against it, including 
an opportunity of personal hearing if requested by the accused or is otherwise necessary 
in the interest of justice, in particular, when the authority contemplates to pass an order 
adverse to the interest of the accused: 
Provided that no such opportunity shall be given where the authority, for reasons 
to be recorded, is satisfied that, in the interest of security of Pakistan or any part thereof, it 
is not expedient to give such an opportunity.  
(3) 
In case, the authority decides to call for a case pending before an inquiry 
officer or inquiry committee or pending before or disposed of by the authorized officer in 
terms of the Government Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 1973, the authority 
may do so in exercise of powers conferred under rule 6A of the said rules: 
Provided that this power shall in no case be exercised after one year of disposal 
of such a case by the Authorized Officer.  
 
12.  
Powers of the inquiry officer or inquiry committee.— (1) For the 
purpose of an inquiry under these rules, the inquiry officer or the inquiry committee, as 
the case may be, shall have the powers of a civil court trying a suit under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (Act No. V of 1908), in respect of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) 
summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining 
him on oath; 
(b) 
requiring the discovery and production of documents and receiving 
evidence on affidavits; and  
(c) 
issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents.  
 
(2) 
The proceedings under these rules shall be deemed to be judicial 
proceedings within the meaning of section 193 and 228 of the Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 
(Act No. XLV of 1860). 
13. 
Rules 7 and 9 not to apply in certain cases.— Nothing in rule 7 or 9 
shall apply to a case— 

Page - 812             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
(a) 
where the accused is dismissed or removed from service, on the ground of 
conduct which has led to a sentence of fine or of imprisonment; or 
(b) 
where the authority competent to dismiss or remove a person from 
service, or to reduce a person in lower post and pay scale, is satisfied that, 
for reasons to be recorded in writing by that authority, it is not reasonably 
practicable to give the accused an opportunity of showing cause.  
14. 
Proceedings before or during training, scholarship and leave.—(1) In 
case where a civil servant who has been nominated for training or scholarship, is required 
to be proceeded against and he has not yet joined the training institute or institution, his 
nomination shall be withdrawn forthwith by the nominating authority under intimation to 
the training institute or institution concerned.     
(2) 
In case where a civil servant has already joined the training or institution 
he shall be allowed to complete his training or scholarship, and the proceedings against 
him may be deferred till completion of the training or scholarship. 
(3) 
No civil servant shall be denied training on account of ongoing 
proceedings for a period of more than one year.  
(4) 
In case where a civil servant on leave, is required to be proceeded against, 
his leave shall be cancelled by the authority and shall be called back from the leave to join 
the proceedings. 
15. 
Duties of the departmental representatives.— The departmental 
representative shall perform the following duties, namely:— 
(a) 
render full assistance to the inquiry officer or the inquiry committee, as 
the case may be, during the proceedings where he shall be personally 
present and fully prepared with all the relevant record relating to the case, 
on each date of hearing.  
(b) 
Cross-examine the witnesses produced by the accused and with the 
permission of the inquiry officer or the inquiry committee, as the case may 
be, may also cross-examine the prosecution witnesses; and 
(c) 
rebut the grounds of defense offered by the accused before the inquiry 
officer or the inquiry committee, as the case may be.  
(2) 
In case of failure to perform the assigned duties, the departmental 
representative shall be liable to departmental proceedings.  
16. 
Order to be passed on receipt of report from the inquiry officer or 
inquiry committee.— (1) On receipt of report from the inquiry officer or the inquiry 
committee, as the case may be, the authority shall examine the report and the relevant 
case material and determine whether the inquiry has been conducted in accordance with 
the provisions of these rules.  

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 813 
 
 
(2) 
If the authority is satisfied under sub-rule (1) that the inquiry has been 
conducted in accordance with the provisions of these rules, it shall further determine 
whether the charge or charges have been proved against the accused or not.  
(3) 
Where the authority is satisfied under sub-rule (2) that the inquiry 
proceedings have not been conducted in accordance with the provisions of these rules or 
the facts and merits of the case have been ignored or there are other sufficient grounds, it 
may, after recording reasons, either remand the inquiry to the inquiry officer or the inquiry 
committee, as the case may be, with such directions as the authority may like to give, or may 
order a de novo inquiry through different inquiry officer or inquiry committee.  
(4) 
The authority may in such case specified under sub-rule (3) also require 
the inquiry officer or the inquiry committee, as the case may be, to explain as to why the 
inquiry has not been conducted in accordance with these rules, or as to why the facts or 
merits of the case have been ignored and on the receipt of reply, may determine that the 
omission or commission by the inquiry officer or the inquiry committee, as the case may 
be, was not in good faith and there are grounds to proceed against the inquiry officer or 
inquiry committee, as the case may be, under these rules.  
(5) 
Where the charge or charges are determined not to have been proved, the 
authority shall exonerate the accused by an order in writing.  
(6) 
Where the charge or charges are determined to have been proved against 
the accused, the authority shall issue a show cause notice to the accused providing him 
therewith a copy of inquiry report by which it shall— 
(a)  
inform him of the charge or charges proved against him and the penalty or 
penalties proposed to be imposed upon him; 
(b) 
give him reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the penalty or 
penalties proposed to be imposed upon him and to submit as to why one 
or more of the penalties as provided in rule 4 including the penalty of 
dismissal from service may not be imposed upon him and to submit 
additional defence in writing, if any, within a period which shall not be 
less than ten days and more than fourteen days from the day the charge or 
charges have been communicated to him by affording him an opportunity 
of personal hearing: 
 
 
Provided that the accused shall in his reply to show cause notice, 
indicate as to whether he wants to be heard in person or not; and 
(c) 
direct the departmental representative to appear with all the relevant 
record on the date of personal hearing, if any.  
(7) 
After duly considering the reply of the accused to the show cause notice 
and affording personal hearing to the accused, as appropriate, the authority shall, keeping 
in view the findings and recommendations of the inquiry officer or the inquiry committee, 
as the case may be, facts of the case and defence offered by the accused if requested, by 
an order in writing— 

Page - 814             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
(a) 
exonerate the accused if charge or charges are not proved; or  
(b) 
impose any one or more of the penalties specified in rule 4 if charges are 
proved: 
Provided that:— 
(i) 
where charge or charges of grave corruption are proved against an 
accused the penalty of dismissal from service shall be imposed, in 
addition to the penalty of recovery, if any; and  
(ii) 
where charge of absence from duty for a period of more than one 
year is proved against the accused, the penalty of compulsory 
retirement or removal or dismissal from service shall be imposed 
upon the accused.  
 
(8) 
After receipt of reply to the show cause notice and affording opportunity 
of personal hearing, the authority, except where the Prime Minister himself is the 
authority, shall decide the case within a period of thirty days, excluding the time during 
which the post held by the authority remained vacant due to certain reasons. 
 
17. 
Personal hearing.— Notwithstanding the proviso to clause (b) of sub-rule 
(6) of rule 16, the authority may, by an order in writing, call the accused and the 
departmental representative, alongwith relevant record of the case, to appear before him, 
or before a hearing officer, who shall as far as possible be senior in rank to the accused, 
appointed by the authority for personal hearing on the fixed date and time.  
 
18. 
Procedure of inquiry against civil servant on deputation or working in 
other Governments or organizations etc.— (1) Where an authority determines to 
proceed against a civil servant who is on deputation to any other Government, 
department, corporation, body corporate, autonomous or semi-autonomous body, statutory 
body or any other organization or institution, hereinafter referred to as the borrowing 
organization, the authority of such civil servant in his parent department may— 
(a) 
ask the relevant Government or borrowing organization, to frame charges 
against the civil servant and forward the same his parent department; or  
(b) 
initiate proceedings against him on its own under these rules.  
 
(2) 
In case of members of All Pakistan Service posted in a Province, 
Establishment Division may refer a case to the Chief Secretary concerned fro probe or 
fact finding inquiry and may initiate proceedings on the findings of that probe or fact 
finding inquiry, or on its own if no findings are received within two months: 
 
Provided that in case of proceedings against any Chief Secretary of a Province, 
the Establishment Division shall frame the charges and initiate the disciplinary 
proceedings with approval of the Prime Minister.  
 
19. 
Appeal. — A civil servant on whom a penalty is imposed shall have such 
right of appeal provided for as under the Civil Servants (Appeal) Rules,1977: 
 
Provided that, where the penalty is imposed by order of the President, there shall 
be no appeal but the civil servant concerned may apply for review of the order.  

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 815 
 
 
 
20. 
Appearance of counsel.— No party to any proceedings under these rules at 
any stage of the proceedings before the appellate authority, authority, inquiry officer or any 
inquiry committee as the case may be, shall be represented by an advocate  
 
 
21. 
Repeal.— (1) The Government Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 
1973, in their application to the civil servants to whom these rules, apply, are hereby 
repealed but the repeal thereof shall not affect any action taken or anything done or suffered 
thereunder.  
 
(2) 
Notwithstanding the repeal of the aforesaid rules, all proceedings pending 
immediately before the commencement of these rules against any civil servant under 
repealed rules shall continue under the repealed rules.  
[Authority.– Establishment Division‘s S.R.O No. 1331 (I)/2020  dated 11-12-2020]. 
 
20.2 
Disciplinary Proceedings Under Government  
Servants (E&D) Rules, 1973 Against Accused  
Government Servants: Furnishing of Case Material 
 
Instances have come to the notice of the Establishment Division that the 
Ministries/Divisions and Provincial Governments, while forwarding the cases for obtaining 
the orders of the competent authority i.e. Establishment Secretary under [rule 5 (1) (i) of 
the Government Servants (E&D) Rules, 1973], do not generally observe the provisions of 
said rules, laid down procedure and earlier instructions issued on the subject matter. It has 
particularly been observed that the copies of relevant documents and case material against 
the accused officers are not enclosed as annex alongwith the Summary/Note for the 
Establishment Secretary, duly signed by the respective authorized officers on the subject. 
 
2. 
All the Secretaries/Additional Secretaries Incharge of Ministries/ Divisions 
and Chief Secretaries of the Provincial Governments are requested to kindly ensure that, 
while forwarding the cases of @BPS-17 and above Federal Government servants for 
obtaining the orders of the Establishment Secretary under @@[rule 5 (1) (i) of the 
Government Servants (E&D) Rules, 1973], following information and copies of documents 
be enclosed alongwith the Summary/Note:– 
(i) 
In case of the proposal for placing @BPS-17 and above Federal Government 
servants under suspension, copies of all relevant documents/ case material 
including bio-data of the accused officer and copies of documents on the 
basis of which suspension of the officer is necessitated viz. any complaint or 
fact finding inquiry/probe etc. be provided. 
 
@@@[(ii) 
In case of a request for extension in suspension period of a government 
                         
Now Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules,2020. 
Rule 5 (1) to (4) of Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules, 2020. 
The role of authorized Officer has not been incorporated in Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline)  
 
Rules,2020.    
@Under Rule 2(c) of Civil Servants (E&D) Rules,2020 read with rule 6 of Civil Servants (A.P&T)Rules,1973, 
the authorities for BS-17 to 19 Officers are now concerned Secretaries. Establishment Division is not required 
to be approached for their cases.  
@@Rule 5 (1) to (4) of Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules, 2020. 
@@@Cases of suspension or forced leave requires to be observed as given in Rule 5 (1) to (4) of Civil Servants 

Page - 816             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
servant under suspension or extension in forced leave period, on expiry of 
current sanction after three months, the present position of the disciplinary 
case, including the stage of inquiry if it is in progress, may invariably be 
stated in the said proposals.] 
(ii) 
In case of recommendation for reinstatement in service of a government 
servant under suspension or termination of forced leave period, the copies 
of complete record of proceedings viz. charge sheet alongwith statement of 
allegations, show cause notice if issued instead of charge sheet, report of 
the Inquiry Officer and final orders of the *Authorized Officer etc. be 
provided. 
[Authority.– Establishment Division‘s O.M. No.11/5/2000-D.1, dated 4-5-2000]. 
 
20.3 
Applicability of Disciplinary Proceedings Against Dismissed, 
Removed or Compulsorily Retired Civil Servants 
 
On a directive from the Chief Executive Secretariat, the question, as to whether 
any order under the Government Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 1973 can 
be passed against a civil servant who already stands dismissed from service, has been 
examined in consultation with Law, Justice & Human Rights Division. It has been 
clarified that if a person is dismissed or removed from service or compulsorily retired, he does 
not retain the status of a civil servant for the purpose of any other disciplinary proceedings or 
imposition of any other penalty. There is a concept of law that the process of appeal is the 
continuation of the original proceedings, therefore, if a dismissed, removed or retired employee 
moves a departmental appeal or representation or files an appeal before the appropriate judicial 
forum he is deemed to be a civil servant for that particular matter only under the said concept of 
continuation of status during the process of appeal. 
 
2. 
Where an appeal is filed, the appellant may be treated as a civil servant for 
the purpose of disposal of that appeal only and the result of any other inquiry that may 
have been conducted may be held in abeyance. However, if the dismissed, removed or 
retired person does not file any appeal, the order of dismissal, removal from service or 
compulsory retirement will attain finality and the result of the other inquiry will become 
infructuous. 
[Authority: Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No.SCE/6/97, dated 14.1.2002]. 
 
21.1 
Procedure for Obtaining Orders of the President 
 
 
or Prime Minister in Disciplinary Cases 
 
It has been decided that in future, all the summaries for the President/Prime 
Minister in disciplinary cases should invariably be accompanied by the information 
desired in the enclosed proforma. The cases/ summaries received without this information 
will be returned back to their respective Ministries and Divisions. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s d.o. letter No.3/4/83-D-2, dated 24-3-1983]. 
                                                             
(Efficiency & Discipline) Rules, 2020. 
Now Prime Minister‘s Office. 
Now Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules, 2020. 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 817 
 
 
BIO-DATA 
 
(TO BE USED IN DISCIPLINARY & OTHER CASES) 
 
1. 
Name of the Officer                                               
 
 
(a) 
Grade ……………. 
 
 
(b) 
Date of Birth & Age on 
 
 
( Years       Months        Days  ) 
 
 
……….    ………….   ……….  
 
(c) 
Date of Joining & Length of Service. 
 
 
(Years        Months         Days) 
 
 
……….    ………….    ………. 
 
 
(d) 
Date of Absence from duty.  (if applicable)  
 
 
……….        ………….    
………. 
 
 
(e) 
Total PERs V.Good, Good, Average, Below Average (Years to be shown 
against Average & Below Average PERs). 
 
 
Note: 
 
 
(1) Any missing PERs with reasons. 
 
 
(2) Photo of the Officer is affixed in the C.R. dossier or not and reasons if 
missing. 
 
 
(f) 
Adverse Remarks. 
 
 
……….    ………….    
………. 
 
 
(g) 
Service (Showing Appointments held). 
 
 
 
……….    ………….    
………. 
 
21.2 
Appointment of an Inquiry Officer Under 
   
the Government Servants (Efficiency &  
Discipline) Rules, 1973 
 
Under rule 9 (1) (a) of the **Government Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) 
Rules, 1973, the ―Authorised Officer‖ has the powers to order holding of inquiry against 
an accused government servant through an Inquiry Officer or Inquiry Committee. It has 
been noticed that sometimes the Ministries/ Divisions/Departments appoint Inquiry 
Officers who are junior to the accused government servant. 
                         
 BPS. 
Now Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules, 2020. 
Amended in the light of Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules, 2020 

Page - 818             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
 
2. 
It is clarified that it is not appropriate to appoint an ―Inquiry Officer‖ 
junior to the officer being proceeded against under the aforementioned rules as that could 
lead to administrative and legal complications at a later stage. All Ministries/Divisions 
are, therefore, advised to keep this aspect in view while appointing inquiry officers in 
cases involving disciplinary cases under the E&D Rules. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 16/61/94-R.2, dated 24-1-1995]. 
 
22.1  
Need of Keeping the Provisions of FR-29 in View  
 
 
 While Imposing the Penalty Under [Rule 4 (c)of the  
 
 Civil Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 2020] 
 
 It is to state that *[rule 4 (c) of the Government Servants (Efficiency and 
Discipline) Rules, 2020] provides for the penalty of reduction to a lower post or time 
scale or to a lower stage in a time scale. In this connection attention is invited to the 
provisions of Fundamental Rule 29 which stipulates that ― if a Government Servant on 
account of misconduct or inefficiency is reduced to a lower grade or post or to a lower 
stage in his time scale, the authority ordering such reduction shall state the period for 
which it shall be effective and whether on restoration it shall operate to postpone future 
increments and if so to what extent‖. Law Division have advised that the provisions of 
FR-29 should be treated as supplementary to *[rule 4 (c) of the Government Servants 
(Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 2020]. It is, therefore, necessary that while passing an 
order imposing a penalty of reduction to a lower post or time scale or to a lower stage in a 
time scale, the requirements prescribed in FR-29 should be strictly observed. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 16/18/94-R.2, dated 09-09-1998]. 
 
22.2 
Disciplinary Procedure to be Followed in Cases 
 
Where No Inquiry Officer/ Committee is Appointed 
 
[Rule 7 (a) to (f) of the Government Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) 
Rules, 2020] provides that if the authorized officer decides that it is not necessary to have 
an inquiry conducted through an Inquiry Officer or Inquiry Committee, he shall:— 
 
(a) 
by order in writing, inform the accused of the action proposed to be taken 
in regard to him and the grounds of action, and 
 
(b) 
give him a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against that action. 
 
2. 
Both the provisions mentioned at (a) and (b) in the preceding paragraph 
are mandatory. On an appeal filed by a government servant against the order of his 
compulsory retirement, the Service Tribunal has recently set aside the order of his 
compulsory retirement on the grounds that neither the action to be taken was specifically 
mentioned in the Show Cause Notice nor was he given a reasonable opportunity of 
                         
 Modified as Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules, 2020. 
 BPS. 
Modified in line with Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules, 2020. 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 819 
 
 
showing cause against the proposed action. It has been pointed out by the Services 
Tribunal that there are decisions of the superior courts on the point that whenever any 
discretion is given to an authority, it has to be exercised not arbitrarily but honestly, 
justly, and fairly in the spirit of rules, and on judicial grounds and for substantial reasons. 
For this purpose, the nature of allegations against the accused has to be considered. In a 
case where it is clear to the [authorized officer] that the accused can be given reasonable 
opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken e.g. where the  
allegations could be decided by reference to record in a summary manner, the procedure 
under sub-rule (iii) of rule 5(1) may be adopted.  Otherwise, the ends of justice would be 
served by ordering an inquiry through an Inquiry Officer or Inquiry Committee. 
 
3. 
In a Show Cause Notice, the proposed action is required to be specified, and no 
general mention is to be made by reference to all the minor or major penalties in the rules. 
 
4. 
Further, serving of a Show Cause Notice and mere reply thereto in denial 
of allegations or mere questions and answers do not amount to affording the accused a 
reasonable opportunity of showing cause as required by [clause (b) of rule 7 (a) to (f) of 
the Government Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 2020]. The requirement of 
reasonable opportunity of showing cause against proposed action will only be satisfied if 
particulars of the charge or charges, substance of evidence in support of the charges and 
specific punishment which would be called for after the charge or charges are established are 
communicated to the civil servant who is given reasonable time and opportunity to show cause. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 6/8/79-D.I., dated 10-7-1979]. 
 
22.3 
Requirement to Issue a Fresh Show Cause Notice If the Penalty 
Imposed Under [Government Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) 
Rules, 1973] or Proposed to be Imposed is Greater than that 
Specified in the Show Cause Notice or is Proposed to be Enhanced 
by the Appellate Authority 
 
As a result of disciplinary action taken against a government servant, the appellate 
authority considered the penalty imposed by the @[authorized officer] to be inadequate and 
enhanced the penalty. The government servant filed an appeal against enhancement of penalty 
before the Services Tribunal (Appeal No. 2(K) of 1980). The Services Tribunal, while 
accepting the appeal, observed that the penalty was enhanced without giving the appellant an 
opportunity of being heard which was against natural justice and further observed that ―we are 
of the firm opinion that even if the rules are silent on the subject, any time an appellant‘s 
punishment is enhanced, he will be given a show cause and a hearing.  This requirement of 
natural justice shall always be read into the rules.‖ The Division concerned referred the 
                         
In the present context ―authorized officer‖ may be meant as ―Authority‖ as mentioned in Rule 2(c) of Civil 
Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules, 2020.     
Modified in line with Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules, 2020. 
Now Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules, 2020. 
@The role of authorized Officer has not been incorporated in Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules,2020.    

Page - 820             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
observation of the Services Tribunal to the Ministry of Law who confirmed that, while it was 
open to the appellate authority to revise the sentence upward, it would be appropriate for the 
appellate authority to give a show cause notice to the appellant and hear him before passing the 
order. They advised that the order of the Tribunal should, therefore, be obeyed: 
 
2. 
The observations of the Service Tribunal and the advice of the Justice 
Division mentioned in para 1 is brought to the notice of all Ministries/Divisions and 
Departments for guidance and compliance. 
 
3.  
The cases in which a penalty is enhanced may be as follows:— 
 
(i) 
Where the authority decides to enhance the penalty proposed by the 
authorized officer and which is greater than the maximum penalty shown 
in the show cause notice issued by the [authorized officer] in terms of 
[rule 7 (a) (b) of the Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules, 2020], or 
in the show cause notice issued by the authorized officer in terms of [rule 7 
(c)], after considering the inquiry report, as the case may be; or 
 
(ii) 
Where the authority in exercise of its revisionary powers under @[rule 11] 
of the rules, decides to enhance a penalty already imposed in a case 
already disposed of or which, in a pending case, is greater than the penalty 
shown in the show cause notice; or 
     
(iii) Where the appellate authority, in exercise of its appellate jurisdiction, 
decides to enhance the penalty already imposed on the appellant. 
 
4. 
The Ministries, Divisions and Departments are advised to ensure that in all 
such cases as are mentioned above, before the penalty is enhanced a show cause notice is 
invariably issued and the accused/appellant is given an opportunity of being heard in person. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 4/42/83-D.2, dated 29-7-1985]. 
 
23.1 @@ [Publication of Notices in  
the Newspapers 
 
It has come to the notice of the government that the procedure of publication of 
notices in the press in the cases of unauthorized absence/ abscondment from duty is being 
frequently resorted to without taking into consideration the provisions of rule 13(b) of the 
Civil Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 2020 which provides for the 
dispensation of adopting even formal procedure in such cases. This not only results in 
undue delay in finalization of these disciplinary cases but also undue wastage of 
government money on publication of such notices. 
                         
The role of authorized Officer has not been incorporated in Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules,2020.    
Modified as per Rule 7 (a) (b) of Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules, 2020.  
Modified as per Rule 7 (c) of Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules, 2020. 
@Modified as per Rule 11 of Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules, 2020. 
@@Sl.No. 23.1 is modified as per Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules, 2020. 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 821 
 
 
 
2.  
The matter has, therefore, been considered in the Establishment Division 
in consultation with Law Division. It is clarified that under the Civil Servants (Efficiency 
and Discipline) Rules, 2020, there is no provision making it obligatory or mandatory for 
the authority/[**] to publish a notice in the newspaper in the cases of unauthorized 
absence/ abscondment from duty. The requirement of rule 7 of the Civil Servants 
(Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 2020, is that the accused may be informed of the action 
proposed to be taken in regard to him and the grounds of such action and that he may be 
given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action. This information can 
be conveyed to him by different means, i.e. by registered post at his last known address or 
by affixation of a notice at that address, etc.  Same is the position under rule 7(b) in 
respect of service of a charge-sheet. According to rule 13 of the said rules nothing in rule 
7 shall apply if the authority competent to dismiss or remove a person from service, or to 
reduce a person in rank, is satisfied that, for reasons to be recorded, in writing, by that 
authority, it is not reasonably practicable to give the accused an opportunity of showing 
cause, for instance, if it is reported that the accused has left his place of abode without 
leaving an address or he has gone out of the country and his whereabouts are not known. 
If the authority mentioned in rule 8(b) is satisfied about the genuineness of the report, it 
may invoke the provision contained in the said rule. The publication of a notice in 
newspapers may not be resorted to. 
 
3. 
The publication of notice in the newspapers, in such cases should, 
however, be resorted to in very rare cases where the competent authority is not in a 
position to record reasons for its satisfaction as to the practicability of affording the 
accused an opportunity of showing cause. There a lack of response to such a notice may 
induce that authority to be so satisfied. 
 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.4/18/83-D-2, dated 15-2-1984]. 
 
23.2 
[Publication of Charge Sheet or  
Show Cause Notice in Newspaper] 
 
A case has come to notice where long leave granted to a postal clerk was 
cancelled and he was asked to resume duty immediately. When he failed to do so, a notice 
was published in the newspaper directing him to resume duty within seven days otherwise 
ex-parte proceedings under the *[Civil Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 2020] 
could be taken against him which might result in his removal from service. He failed to 
resume duty. He was accordingly dismissed from service. His departmental appeal was 
rejected. Thereafter, he filed an appeal in the Services Tribunal (Appeal 2(P) of 1984). 
The Services Tribunal accepted the appeal and set aside the order holding as follows: 
―It is manifestly evident that the impugned order was passed without 
taking any proceeding under the Efficiency & Discipline Rules though in 
the notice published in the newspaper it was categorically stated that in 
case of failure of the appellant to resume duties, ex-parte proceedings 
                         
Modified as per Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules, 2020. 

Page - 822             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
under the E&D Rules would be taken against him. In any case, the 
punishment of dismissal from service could be awarded only after taking 
proceedings under the E&D Rules which was not done and the impugned 
order was passed in an arbitrary and unlawful manner. The position being 
so clear, the impugned order cannot be sustained and we have no option 
but to set it aside.‖ 
 
2. 
The observations of the Service Tribunal are brought to the notice of all 
Ministries, Divisions and Departments who should ensure that due care is taken in 
observing the requirements of *[Civil Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 2020] 
in taking disciplinary action against civil servants. In this case, what was published was 
merely a notice or a warning that if the clerk did not resume duty, action under *[Civil 
Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 2020] would be taken. However, on his 
failure to resume duty as directed, order to dismissal was straightway passed without 
initiating disciplinary action on the ground of misconduct. 
 
3. 
In this connection, a reference is also invited to the Establishment Division 
O.M. No. 4/18/83-D.2, dated 15th February, 1984, bringing out the requirement of rule 
13, clause (b) and the circumstances in which that rule can be involved. According to rule 
13(b), nothing in rule 7 (containing inquiry procedure) will apply to a case where the 
competent authority is satisfied that for reasons to be recorded, in writing, it is not 
reasonably practicable to give the accused an opportunity or showing cause. If all efforts 
to communicate with the accused through normal channels (like sending him the notice or 
charge sheet by registered post to his known addresses) fail, that may induce the authority 
to be so satisfied. For this purpose, publication of charge sheet or show cause notice, as 
the case may be, in the national press is certainly not required. However, if in rare cases, 
the competent authority is unable to satisfy itself that it is not reasonably practicable to 
communicate with the accused, the competent authority may publish the notice i.e. show 
cause notice in terms of rule 7(b) of the Civil Servants (E&D) Rules, 2020 or rule 7(c) or 
charge sheet in terms of rule 7 (as the case may be) in the newspapers and any lack of 
response to it may satisfy the competent authority that it is not responsibly practicable to 
give the accused an opportunity of showing cause. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.4/18/83-D.2, dated 9-7-1985]. 
 
24.1 
Leaving Station by Government 
 
Servants Under Suspension 
 
It has been observed that, on being placed under ―suspension‖, an officer is 
generally prohibited from leaving the station. This is desirable where it is felt that, unless he is 
confined to a particular station, he might tamper with the evidence likely to be produced against 
him, but such prohibition should not be enforced if there is no cause for such apprehension. He 
should simply be required to inform the authority concerned of his movement. 
[Authority.- Para 3 Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. F. 32/48-Estt.(SE), dated 21-7-1949]. 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 823 
 
 
24.2 
Bar Against Use of Government Stationery and Service Postage 
Stamps by Accused Government Servants in Disciplinary 
Proceedings 
 
The question whether an accused government servant is entitled to use government 
stationery and service postage stamps in replying to the charges framed against him and in 
making other correspondence in connection with his defence has recently been examined 
and it is decided that an accused government servant is not entitled to use government 
stationery and service postage stamps in replying to the charges or making other 
correspondence in connection with his defence. Cost of stationery and postage stamps 
required by him in connection with his defence has, in all cases, to be borne by the accused 
government servant himself. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 2/29/67-D,I., dated 8-1-1968]. 
 
25.1 
Filling Up of Suspension Vacancies 
 
The question, whether a vacancy caused by suspension of a government servant 
can be filled-up like other ordinary vacancies, has been recently examined in consultation 
with the Ministry of Finance and the Law Division. It has been decided that though a vacancy 
caused by suspension of an officer cannot be filled-up substantively, it can be filled up on an 
officiating basis, and that no supernumerary post need be created in such case. 
 
2.  
This supersedes Establishment Division‘s O.M.No.2/14/67- C.III, dated 
the 19th September, 1968. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 6/2/71-D.I, dated 20-9-1971]. 
25.2 
Termination of Services of Temporary  
Government Servants under Suspension 
 
Attention is invited to Establishment Division‘s O.M. Nos. 21/11/61-D.I, dated 
22nd December, 1962 (Annex-I) and 18th April, 1963 (Annex-II) on the subject of ―Speedy 
Disposal of Disciplinary Cases-Policy Regarding Government Servants undergoing Criminal 
Prosecution before Departmental Action‖. It is stated that the advice of the Justice Division 
was sought whether it was possible to terminate the services of an employee, who was 
arrested on a criminal charge of murder and had been undergoing trial for a long time, 
without any notice and without assigning any reasons, in accordance with the terms and 
conditions of his service as contained in his letter of appointment. The position as per advice 
of the Justice Division*, is as follows:  
 
2. 
A civil servant is not necessarily in temporary employment merely because 
of a statement in the order of appointment that his appointment will be purely temporary and 
liable to termination at any time without any notice or reasons being assigned. No civil 
servant is a temporary employee as long as the employment is for an indefinite period or 
against a post which continues to exist for an indefinite period. It is extremely difficult to 
                         
* Law & Justice Division. 

Page - 824             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
attribute to the legislature an intention to clothe the authorities concerned with arbitrary 
power of terminating the service of a civil servant in their discretion without assigning any 
reason. The courts have always been reluctant to interpret these provisions in a manner as 
would justify the externment of an employee without any justification. 
 
3. 
Further after the enactment of Civil Servants Act, 1973, the services of a civil 
servant can either be terminated under section 11 of the Act or under [Civil Servants 
(Efficiency & Discipline) Rules, 2020]. It is not possible to spell out any power to terminate 
the services of an employee without notice and without assigning any reason from the 
provisions of sub section (3) of section 11 of Civil Servants Act, 1973, especially in the 
presence of the provisions of sub-section (1) thereof regarding termination of service during 
the initial or extended period of probation. If an employee has passed through the period of 
probation to the satisfaction of the competent authority, he is no longer a temporary 
employee with the meanings of sub section (3) if his employment is for an indefinite period 
or against a post which continues to exist for an indefinite period. 
 
4. 
In the light of the above advice of the Justice Division, services of an 
employee can no more be terminated without notice and with assigning reason [on the basis 
of the contents of Establishment Division‘s O.M. dated 22nd December 1962 (Annex I) and 
18th April 1963 (Annex II) referred to above]. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.31/64/86-R3 dated  20-4-1987]. 
(ANNEX I) 
[Copy of Establishment Division O.M. No.12/11/61-D.I, dated 22nd December, 1962]. 
 
Instances have come to the notice of the government that there are still a number of 
cases pending in courts against officials for unusually long periods without departmental 
proceedings having been ever resorted to. It has also been found that, in some cases, the 
accused officials have, while continuing under suspension, been absconding for long and 
sometimes for years, presumably with intent to frustrate or delay the court proceedings.  
With a view to meeting such situations, it has been decided that, whenever such an instance 
comes to the notice of the government, the accused official, whether permanent or 
temporary, should be asked by his last known address to report to his official superior/court. 
If he does not comply with the order, government should take up the formalities of his 
dismissal from service on charge of misconduct under the Government Servants 
(Efficiency & Discipline) Rules.[If he turns up and is a temporary hand, his services 
should be terminated after serving him with the requisite notice or paying him salary in lieu 
thereof, without assigning any reasons for the action]. 
 
2. 
There may still be cases of temporary government servants undergoing 
                         
Modified as per Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules, 2020. 
 Now Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules,2020. 
 Note: This applies to temporary employments made on or after 08-06-1962. 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 825 
 
 
long-drawn court proceedings even if they have not absconded.  If in any individual case 
of this nature, the appointing authority considers that irrespective of the outcome of the 
court proceedings, the accused official should not be allowed to continue any longer on 
the pay roll of the government, such authority may recall the official to duty and terminate 
his services after serving him with the requisite notice or paying his salary in lieu thereof 
without assigning any reasons for the action. [The course of action discussed in this 
paragraph should be resorted to unless, of course, there is any direction of the court to the 
contrary in any particular case]. 
 
3. 
It is requested that all Ministries/Divisions, etc., may kindly check up the 
position of their employees involved in court proceedings and deal with the individual 
cases in the light of the suggestions contained in preceding paragraphs. 
 (ANNEX II) 
[Copy of Establishment Division O.M. No.12/11/61-D-I date the 18th  April, 1963]. 
Reference.- Establishment Division O.M. No. 12/11/61-D.I, dated the 22nd December, 
1962 (Annex I) 
 
A question has arisen as to whether it was necessary to recall a suspended 
temporary government servant to duty before serving him with the requisite notice of 
discharge on the ground that his services were no longer required. The point has been 
further examined in Establishment Division in consultation with Law Division and it has 
been held that a suspended temporary government servant can be served with service 
termination notice in accordance with the terms of the appointment during the period of 
suspension and discharged after the notice period without requiring him to resume duty. 
 
2. 
Utmost precaution should, however, be taken to see that no reason is 
assigned for the termination except saying that his services are no longer required by the 
government. 
25.3 
Bar Against Mentioning of Unfinalised  
Departmental Proceedings in  
Confidential Reports 
 
It has been noticed that in some annual confidential reports of officers received 
from various Ministries, a reference is made to departmental proceedings which are still in 
progress against the officers concerned. 
 
2. 
The Establishment Division feel that until and unless the result of such 
proceedings has been known and final orders, awarding punishment, if any, have been 
passed by the competent authority, it would not be correct to make any such reference as 
                         
Note: This applies to temporary employments made on or after 08-06-1962. 
Now Performance Evaluation Reports. 

Page - 826             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
may have the effect of creating doubts about the conduct and character of the officers 
concerned. It can hardly be controverted that such a reference, although factually correct, if 
inadvertently made, cannot fail to damage the officer‘s record even if in the long run he is 
completely exonerated. 
 
3. 
In the circumstances it is requested that, in the case of an officer against whom 
departmental proceedings are in progress, no mention, whatsoever, should be made about it in 
his annual confidential reports. Only when such proceedings have been finalized, and the 
punishment, if any, has been awarded, should a mention about it be made in his confidential 
report. In such a case, a complete copy of the final order may be placed, as is usually done, on 
his character roll. 
[Authority.- Estt. Secretary‘s D.O. letter No.9(1)/58-S.E.III, dated 8-5-1958]. 
 
26.1 T.A. Admissible to Witnesses and Accused Government  
Servant Summoned by an Inquiry Officer 
 
A government servant summoned by an Inquiry Officer should be allowed TA as 
admissible to him under S. R. 154 „et seq‟ and he should draw it on a regular TA bill from 
his own department on the strength of the Attendance Certificate furnished by the Inquiry 
Officer and this should be debited against the office at whose instance the inquiry was being 
conducted, by book adjustment. In the case of a witness who is not a government servant, 
travelling expenses should be determined by the Inquiry Officer with reference to the status of 
the witness and should be paid on the basis of the orders passed by the Inquiry Officer, by the 
department at whose instance the inquiry was being conducted. The TA to be paid to a 
non-government servant should, however, in no case exceed the maximum TA admissible to a 
government servant of the highest grade. The provisions of S.R. 190 „et seq‟ should also be 
kept in view in such cases. 
[Authority. - Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 2/41/62-D.I, dated 28-2-1963]. 
26.2 
Admissibility of TA to Witness 
  
in Disciplinary Cases 
 
In continuation of the Establishment Division O. M. No. 2/41/62 D. I, dated the 28th 
February, 1963, a further question has since arisen as to whether the aforesaid provision of TA 
should equally apply to the defence witness summoned by the Inquiry Officer in departmental 
proceedings. The point has been examined in Establishment Division in consultation with the 
Ministry of Finance. The position of the defence witnesses regarding summoning them and 
paying them TA is as explained hereunder. 
 
2. 
It is for the Inquiry Officer to consider if any particular witness cited by the 
accused as a defence witness is likely to be as essential witness for the purpose of defence or in 
other words, for the determination of truth. If the Inquiry Officer agrees that the examination of 
the witness will be essential, he may summon him and as soon as he summons him, he will take 
                         
Now Performance Evaluation Reports. 
 Supplementary Rules. 
 et seq abbr., and what follows; Latin ‗et sequentia‟. 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 827 
 
 
upon himself the obligation to allow the witness reasonable TA. If the witness is an official, he 
is to draw the TA from his parent department on the strength of the attendance certificate 
furnished by the Inquiry Officer, the amount being debited by book adjustment against the 
office at whose instance the inquiry was conducted. 
 
3. 
If, however, the Inquiry Officer is not satisfied whether the examination of 
a particular witness will be essential for the determination of truth he may at his 
discretion, refuse to summon such a witness. He may, however, agree to summon him on 
condition that the accused will bear the travelling expenses of the witness and he may 
accordingly require the accused to deposit with him the anticipated amount of the TA of 
the witness, in advance, so that the witness could be paid therefrom. In that case, the 
attendance certificate to be furnished to the witness by the Inquiry Officer should contain 
the endorsement that the witness has been paid his travelling expenses. This will debar the 
witness from claiming the TA again from the government. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 2/41/62-DI, dated 13-4-1963]. 
26.3 
Admissibility of TA to Government  
 
Servants under Suspension 
 
A question has since arisen as to whether a government servant under suspension 
who was required to perform official journey as a witness or as an accused, would be 
entitled to TA. The question has been examined in Establishment Division, in consultat-
ion with the Ministry of Finance, and it has been held that such a government servant 
would be entitled to TA in such cases and his *grade and salary for that purpose would be 
taken as if he was not under suspension. 
[Authority. - Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 2/41/62-DI, dated 19-7-1963]. 
26.4 
Framing of an Additional Charge During  
 
Currency of the Disciplinary Proceedings 
 
Instances have come to the notice of the Establishment Division that in cases where 
the main charge of ―corruption‖ or ―subversion‖ was not proved, but there was sufficient 
evidence to establish the charge of ―misconduct the accused could not be punished because he 
had not been charged with misconduct‖, although the offences of ―corruption‖ and ―subvers-
ion‖ are the graver forms of ―misconduct‖. To meet such exigencies, it has been decided in 
consultation with the Law Division, that in all suitable cases where an accused is charged with 
―corruption‖ or ―subversion‖, an additional charge of ―misconduct‖ may be added to the main 
charge. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 2/5/66-D.I, dated 11-6-1966]. 
 
27.1 Scope of Departmental Proceedings Under the Efficiency &  
Discipline Rules in Cases Referred to the Courts 
 
References are very often received in the Establishment Division on the above 
                         
* BPS. 

Page - 828             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
subject in various forms. The questions generally posed by the Ministries/ Divisions are 
as under:— 
 
(i) 
Whether departmental proceedings can be started against a government 
servant who is being prosecuted in a criminal court; 
 
(ii) 
Whether departmental inquiry can be conducted against a government 
servant on the same charges after his acquittal by a court; 
      
(iii)   Whether any departmental action lies against a government servant who 
cannot be prosecuted in a court of law due to technical grounds. 
 
2. 
The matter has been examined in consultation with Law Division. Each 
case has to be decided on its merits and in the light of its facts and circumstances. 
However some guidelines can be laid down in the matter, and the following general 
guidelines are indicated for deciding such matters:- 
 
(i) 
There is no legal bar to the holding of a departmental inquiry against a 
government servant who is being prosecuted in a criminal court.  It may, 
however, be pointed out that where the holding of departmental inquiry 
side by side with the criminal proceedings may have the effect of impeding 
the course of justice or of prejudicing the trial, the inquiry should be 
deferred till the termination of criminal proceedings. 
 
(ii) 
An acquittal from a criminal case may be on technical grounds or on the 
ground that all the ingredients of the offence are not proved by the 
evidence produced in court. But in departmental proceedings even one of 
the ingredients, if proved, may be sufficient to reach a conclusion that the 
accused has misconducted himself or has acted in a grossly negligent way 
or has shown inefficiency in the discharge of his official duties. As an example, 
to illustrate this point, a recent case may be cited. An officer employed in the 
Registry of the Supreme Court was charged and tried for embezzlement. He 
was, however, acquitted by the High Court in criminal appeal No. 676 of 1965. 
Subsequently, he was dismissed on the same allegations which were found 
proved in a departmental inquiry initiated by the Supreme Court. Thus 
departmental proceedings on the same facts may be started even if the person 
concerned has been acquitted in criminal proceedings. 
 
(iii) In some cases, a government servant cannot be criminally prosecuted on 
technical grounds. But this does not bar the government from inquiring 
into the truth of a charge against a government servant by means of a 
departmental inquiry.  Therefore, there is no bar to proceed against a 
government servant departmentally, when he cannot be criminally 
prosecuted in a court of law for some reason or other. 
[Authority. - Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 4/5/69-D.I, dated 17-6-1969]. 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 829 
 
 
 
27.2 
Quick Disposal of Disciplinary Proceedings Pending Against 
Government Servants Who are About to Superannuate 
 
It has come to the notice of government that inquiry proceedings against civil 
servants under the [Government Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 1973] tend to 
be unduly protracted for various avoidable reasons causing hardships to the affected 
government servants on the one hand and defeating the purpose of speedy disposal of cases 
in others. This is obviously against dictates of justice. 
 
2. 
The disposal of disciplinary proceeding assumes vital importance, especially 
in cases against government servants who are about to attain the age of superannuation. It 
goes without saying that delay in disposal of such cases not only causes hardships to the 
affected persons but also puts the administration to unnecessary criticism. 
 
3. 
It is, therefore, requested that disciplinary proceedings against government 
servants nearing the age of superannuation in future should be disposed of before they 
superannuate. All the agencies working under the administrative control of the Ministry 
concerned should be advised accordingly. 
[Authority.-Estt. Division‘s O.M. No.12/2/88-R.3, dated 3-10-1988]. 
 
27.3 
Censure, Reprimand and Warning 
 
From references received, it appears that some authorities are not clear regarding 
the procedure to be followed where punishment of Censure is awarded and regarding the 
distinction between ‗Censure‘ and ‗Warning‘. 
 
2. 
Censure is one of the punishments mentioned in *[rule 4 (2) (a) of the 
Efficiency and Discipline Rules, 2020]. 
 
3. 
There is essentially no difference between ‗Censure and reprimand‘, but as 
the official term is ‗Censure‘, it seems preferable that normally this term should be used. 
 
4. 
[ Not reproduced ] 
 
5.   
According to rule 3 of the Civil Servants (Appeal) Rules, 1977, every civil 
servant is entitled to appeal to the appellate authority from an order of Censure passed by 
an authorized officer or an authority provided that, where the penalty is imposed by an 
order of the President, the civil servant has no right to appeal but he can apply for review 
of the order. 
 
6.  A warning, whether oral or written and whether given ad hoc or in annual 
confidential report, is not a censure and does not constitute a punishment, provided that it 
is genuinely a warning and not a censure distinguished as such. 
[Authority. - Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 3/1/52-SE. II, dated 12-4-1952 with necessary  
adaptations in the light of prevailing circumstances]. 
                         
Now Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules, 2020. 
 Performance Evaluation Report (PER). 

Page - 830             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
 
28.1 Participation of Government  
Servants in Drinking Parties 
 
It has been reported that a number of persons organize drinking and other parties 
in Rawalpindi/Islamabad, which are attended by civil as well as military officers, and 
where views on government policies are expressed without reservations. 
 
2. 
While drinking is a manifest violation of the law of the country and the 
sanctity of Islam, criticism of government by its functionaries, particularly at such 
gatherings, is a serious offence. 
 
3. 
Under the Prohibition (Enforcement of Hadd) Order, 1979, alcoholic 
drinks are available to only non-Muslim foreigners and non-Muslim Citizens of Pakistan. 
As such, all government servants are apt to strictly follow the aforesaid Order and desist 
from such vices. 
 
4. 
It is requested that severe disciplinary action may be taken against the 
defaulters, irrespective of their status; and they may also be debarred from employment 
under the government, semi-government organizations, and autonomous bodies. 
 
[Authority. - Estt. Secretary‘s D.O. letter No.5/1/79 DIV, dated 17-9-1979]. 
28.2 
Officers‘ Duty to Watch Conduct  
 
of their Subordinates 
 
It has been decided that all officers should be informed that it is their duty to 
watch the conduct of their subordinates and to ensure that corruption does not spread 
among them. Failures to do so would be reflection on their own efficiency. 
[Authority. - Estt. Division‘s O.M.No. 3/35/59-SE.II, dated 4-3-1959]. 
 
28.3 
Responsibility of Head of Department  
 
 
for Corruption in Department 
 
Measures undertaken to curb corruption in the police have shown appreciable 
results, and its personnel deserve to be commended, and encouraged to continue with 
their efforts in that direction. 
 
2. 
Meanwhile, public complaints of corruption in several government 
departments persist, and effective steps are required to root it out. It is the bounden duty 
of every Head of Department to exercise utmost vigilance, analyse the cause, and trace 
the source where incidence of corruption occurs. 
 
3. 
In future, a Head of Department will bear the responsibility, and be 
answerable for proven charges of corruption within the area of his administrative 
jurisdiction. It is self-evident that corruption prevails in a department if its Head is: 
(a) 
himself corrupt, or 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 831 
 
 
(b) 
wilfully blind to corruption taking place, or 
(c) 
so inefficient that he is unable to control it. 
 
4. 
Whichever of these three reasons may be applicable, such a Head of 
Department cannot be retained in service to the detriment of government‘s objective of 
serving the people and promoting their weal and welfare. 
[Authority.- President of Pakistan‘s note No. 57/l/CMLA, dated 25-9-1978]. 
28.4 
Loss of Security Passes to be  
Treated as ‗Misconduct‘ 
 
As provided in para 97 of the [Security Instructions] (1973 Edition) prepared by 
the Cabinet Division and this Division‘s Circular letter No. 14/17/71-Cord., dated the 
18th November, 1971, a government servant who has lost the Security Pass issued to him 
is required:— 
 
(i) 
to make report to the Police Station and to the Head of his Department 
about the loss of the Pass; and 
 
(ii) 
to deposit Rs. 5 in the State Bank of Pakistan before a new Security Pass is 
issued to him. The amount of Rs.5 covers only the cost of the pass and 
actually no penalty has been imposed on him. It has been noticed that the 
government servants generally do not take sufficient care to keep the 
passes in safe custody with the result that loss of security passes is on the 
increase. As the pass lost can be misused by any unauthorized person 
which involves serious security risk, it has been decided, in consultation 
with the authorities concerned, that the loss of Security Pass would be 
treated as ―misconduct‖ in terms of [Civil Servants (Efficiency and 
Discipline) Rules, 2020]. 
 
2. 
However, before any action is initiated against a government servant who 
has lost his Security Pass, it is necessary to determine, in each case as to whether the 
security pass in question was lost due to negligence. If the government servant concerned 
is able to give a satisfactory account of the circumstances under which the security pass 
was lost by him, it may not be proper to proceed against him. If, after preliminary inquiry, 
it is found that the Security Pass was lost due to the negligence of the government servant 
concerned or that the lost Security Pass had fallen into unauthorized hands as a result of 
any wilful omission or commission on his part, only then it would be appropriate to take 
disciplinary action against him under the *[Civil Servants (E&D) Rules, 2020]. 
 
3. 
All Ministries and Divisions are, therefore, requested that in future while 
referring the case of issue of a Security Pass to a person who has already lost a Security 
Pass, it may also please be clearly indicated whether disciplinary action, or if any, has 
                         
Modified as per Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules, 2020.  

Page - 832             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
been taken/is being taken against the official concerned. 
[Authority.- Ministry of Interior O.M. No. 19/2/75-Security dated 31-3-1975 as amended  
vide O.M. No.19/9/75- Security dated 2nd August, 1982]. 
28.5 
Use of Intemperate and Inappropriate 
 
Language in Representations and Petitions 
 
of Government Servants 
 
At times, representations of government servants contain wild allegations against 
superior officers. While government servants would be free to submit their representations in 
accordance with the prescribed procedure whenever they feel aggrieved, they should be 
informed that the use of such language constitutes misconduct. You may, therefore, impress 
upon all government servants working under your administrative control the need and 
propriety of refraining from the use of such language and to scrupulously observe the norms 
of decency and decorum.  Failure to do so on their part will not only result in no action being 
taken on requests contained in such representations/petitions but will also render them liable 
to disciplinary action for misconduct. Serious action will also be taken when wild allegations 
are made against senior officers which, on investigations, are found to be without any basis. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s D.O. letter No.8/13/71-F.II, dated 28-5-1974]. 
28.6 
Grant of Leave to Government Servants Compulsorily 
 
Retired from Service under the *Government Servants 
 
(Efficiency and Discipline) Rules 
 
A reference is invited to the Establishment Division‘s O.M. No. 4/13/60-SR, dated the 
4th October, 1960 (Annex) and it is stated that the instructions contained therein have been 
reviewed in Establishment Division and in supersession of these instructions, it has been 
decided that government servants compulsorily retired from service as a measure of punishment 
under the Government Servants (E&D) Rules, 1973 should not be granted leave preparatory to 
retirement. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No.4/8/88-D.I, dated 4-4-1977]. 
ANNEX 
 
[Copy of O.M. No. 4/13/60-SR, dated the 4th October, 1960]. 
 
It has been decided that the government servants compulsorily retired from 
Establishment Division service under the Government Servants (Efficiency and 
Discipline) Rules, 1960, may be granted leave preparatory to retirement under the normal 
rules.  However, each case should be decided on its own merit by the competent authority 
as defined in Rule 2 (1) of those Rules. 
                         
Now Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules, 2020. 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 833 
 
 
28.7 
Grant of Arrears of Pay and Allowances to Government Servants 
for Period of Absence from Duty, on Re-Instatement as a Result of 
Court‘s Decisions 
 
The Supreme Court, in its recent judgment in C.A. No.28 of 1969 [West Pakistan 
VS.  Mrs. A. V. Issacs], has ruled that a civil servant has and always had the right to recover 
salary already accrued due to him despite the fact that his service was during ―Pleasure‖. 
This has rendered obsolete its own two earlier judgments in the cases of Mehrajuddin [PLD 
1959 SC (Pak) 147] and Fazl-e-Haq Mussarrat [PLD 1960 SC (Pak) 208] and a judgment of 
the former Federal Court in the case of Ali Ahmed Hussain Shah [PLD 1955 FC 522] all of 
which followed the Privy Council‘s view on I. M. Lall‘s case and which was also followed in 
the Law Ministry. In its latest judgment, the Supreme Court has taken the view that if the 
dismissal of a government servant is held to be unlawful he should be allowed salary for the 
period he was kept out of service. This was, however, subject to the condition that if he has 
accepted other employment or engaged in other profitable business during this period, any 
amount earned by him by way of salary from such employment or as profits of such business 
would have to be set off against the salary due, firstly because as government servant he 
cannot serve elsewhere or engage in any other business without the permission of the 
government and secondly, because on general principle a person cannot be allowed to reap a 
double advantage. Therefore, it would be no more open to the government to resist claim for 
arrears of pay of a civil servant wrongfully removed from service on the plea that no such 
claim was competent. The claim will have to be resisted, if at all, on the facts of a particular 
case referred to in the judgment as exceptional cases. The right of the government servant to 
claim future salary has, however, been negatived by the court. 
 
2. 
In view of the latest judgment of the Supreme Court on the subject, a civil 
servant‘s claim for arrears of salary in the relevant circumstances cannot now be refused. 
Therefore, Law Division‘s earlier advice to the contrary must be deemed to have been recalled 
and the Establishment Division is requested to review, in consultation with the Ministry of 
Finance, all the pending cases relating to claims of arrears of pay in the light of the fresh 
declaration of law by the Supreme Court and settle such claims. The Supreme Court‘s judgment 
underlines the necessity of duly observing with care the provisions of the Constitution and the 
Government Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, in all disciplinary cases against 
government servants and of expeditious disposal of such cases. 
[Authority.- Law Division‘s O.M.No.F.7(8)/70-SOL(I), dated 12-8-1970]. 
28.8 
Reinstatement of Government Servants on Court  
Decision and Functions of Enquiry Committee 
 
A reference is invited to the O.M. from the Law Division No. F. 7(8)/70-Sol(I), 
dated 12th August, 1970, which states, inter alia, that, in accordance with the Supreme 
Court‘s judgment in CA No. 28 of 1969 (West Pakistan vs Mrs. A. V. Issacs), if the 
dismissal of a government servant is held to be unlawful, he has to be allowed salary for 
                         
Now Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules, 2020. 

Page - 834             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
the period he was kept out of service, reduced by the amount, if any, that he might have 
earned by way  of salary, or as profits, on account of having accepted some employment, 
or having been engaged in some profitable business, during the above period. Thus, the 
legal status of government servants‘ claims for arrears of pay and allowances is no longer 
the same as had been indicated in para 3 of this Ministry‘s circular d.o. No.F.9(15)-RI 
(Rwp)/61, dated 23rd December, 1961 (Annex). Consequently, it is no longer appropriate 
for the enquiry committee referred to in para 4 of that circular D.O. to consider on merits, 
in cases in which government servants are restored to their posts as a result of court‘s 
decisions, as to whether or not, and to what extent, pay and allowance for the period of 
their absence from duty should be restored.  
 
2. 
It has accordingly been decided that, in cases where a government servant 
is reinstated retrospectively as a result of a court‘s decision, the functions of the enquiry 
committee to be set up under para 4 of this Ministry‘s circular d.o.No.F.9(15)-RI (Rwp)/61, 
dated 23rd  December, 1961, as amended (Annex) would henceforth be as follows:- 
(a) 
The Ministry/Division/Department as the case may be, may obtain from the 
government servant concerned a solemn declaration, supported by an affidavit, 
as to the particulars of his employment, or engagement in profitable business, 
during the period of his absence from duty, and the amount earned by him by 
way of salary from such employment, or as profits in such business. 
(b) 
After examining such evidence as might be available, and cross-examining, if 
necessary, the government servant, the Ministry/Division/ Department, as the 
case may be, may give their finding as to whether or not the above declaration 
is, ‗prima facie‟, acceptable and on what grounds. 
(c) 
If the declaration is found to be, ‗prima facie‟, unacceptable, the 
Ministry/Division/Department, as the case may be, should refer the case to the 
committee, which, before giving their finding as to the amount earned by the 
government servant during the period of absence from duty, may get the 
declaration properly verified/ scrutinized by any agency they consider 
appropriate.  For example, if the case had been dealt with by the Special Police 
Establishment at an earlier stage in any connection, this verification/scrutiny 
may be arranged to be carried out by that Establishment. For purposes of this 
verification/security, assistance of the relevant Income-tax authorities, may also 
be sought, if the government servant concerned be an Income-tax payer. 
(d) 
In case the reinstatement of the government servant has been ordered by the 
court on account of the relevant administrative action having been found to be 
defective, the committee should also give their findings: 
(i) 
as to which officers were responsible for that defectiveness of 
administrative action; and 
                         
 FIA. 
 Agency. 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 835 
 
 
 (ii) as to whether any, and what part, of the amount payable to the 
government servant by way of net salary for the period of his absence 
from duty, might justifiably be recovered from such officers. The 
recovery from such officers will, of course, follow departmental 
proceedings under the Government Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) 
Rules. 
 
3. 
The above instructions do not apply to cases in which government servants 
are reinstated as a result of acceptance of appeals by departmental appellate authorities, 
which will continue to be regulated by the provisions of FR-54, as hitherto. 
[Authority.- Finance Division‘s O.M.No.781-R4/73-F.3(4)-R.I/73, dated 10-7-1973]. 
(ANNEX) 
 
[Extract of Paras 4 & 5 of the Finance Division letter No. F.I(15) RI 
(Rwp)/61, dated 23rd December, 1961 as amended]. 
 
4. 
If as a result of court‘s decision, a government servant restored to his post, 
the question whether pay and allowances for the period he was under suspension or was 
removed from service should be decided on the merit of each case. For this purpose, it is 
suggested that in all cases the Ministry or Department concerned should order a 
departmental enquiry headed by the representative of the Ministry/Deptt. administratively 
concerned with their Financial Adviser/ Deputy Financial Adviser as a member of the 
Committee. This committee should consider whether, on the merits of the case, 
government would be justified in restoring the official concerned, the pay and allowances 
for the period involved and, if so, whether in full or in part. In coming to a conclusion 
whether pay and allowances to the individual should or should not be restored, following 
considerations will have to kept in view:— 
 (a) whether the person concerned was acquitted on a purely technical or 
procedural grounds or whether the actually allegations against him had 
been gone into and were found to be incorrect; 
 (b) whether the individual during the period he was away from active duty and 
other sources of income; and so on. 
 
5. 
It has further been decided that in cases where the total period involved 
does not exceed 12 months from the time the individual was suspended or removed from 
service, the final decision should be taken by the Ministry concerned at the level of the 
Secretary and in all other cases the matter should be referred to the Ministry of Finance 
for prior concurrence. 
 
                         
 Now Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules, 2020. 

Page - 836             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
28.9 
Grant of Arrears of Pay and Allowances to Government Servants 
for Period of Absence from Duty, on Reinstatement as a Result of 
Court‘s Decision 
 
Due to certain subsequent developments, instructions issued vide Finance 
Division circular D.O No. F-9(15) R.I (Rwp)/61, dated 23-12-1961 and O.M No. 781-
R4/73-F.3(4)-R-I/73, dated 10-07-1973  called for a revision. FR-53 and FR-54 have 
been amended and government servants under suspension are now entitled to a 
subsistence grant equal to full pay and allowances. Similarly, employees reinstated in 
service administratively or as a result of the court‘s decision with consequential benefits 
are allowed salary for the period they stayed out of service. 
 
2. 
In view of the above, therefore, there is no need to refer cases to the 
Finance Division for payment of arrears of pay and allowance pertaining to the period of 
suspension. In cases of reinstatement after removal/dismissal as a result of courts‘ 
decisions, however, the Ministry/Division/Department concerned has to determine the 
amount earned by the government servant concerned from other sources during the period 
he remained out of service. For this purpose, the Ministry/Division/Department concerned 
should obtain a solemn declaration from the government servant concerned in the form of 
an affidavit as to the particulars of his employment/business or any other profitable work 
undertaken by him during the period of his absence from duty and the amount earned 
therefrom. The case should, then, be examined by a Departmental Enquiry Committee on 
which Finance Division may be represented by the FA/DFA concerned. The Committee 
may examine such other evidence as it may require and give its findings and 
recommendations to the Secretary of the Ministry / Division concerned for such orders as 
he may deem appropriate. 
[Authority: Estt. Div.‘s O.M No. F.5(17)-R-1/2000, dated 4th August, 2000.] 
 
29.1 Committals to Prison- [CSR 194] 
 
A government servant who has been charged for a criminal offence or debt and 
is committed to prison shall be considered as under suspension from the date of his arrest. 
In case such a government servant is not arrested or is released on bail, the competent 
authority may suspend him, by specific order, if the charge against him is connected with 
his position as government servant or is likely to embarrass him in the discharge of his 
duties or involves moral turpitude. During suspension period, the government servant 
shall be entitled to the subsistence grant as admissible under ―FR-53‖.  
29.2 
Detention of Government Servants  
 
Under Public Safety Acts 
 
A question has arisen whether an employee of the Federal Government who is 
detained in prison for a period of time under the provisions of the Sindh Maintenance of 
Public Safety Act, 1948 or a similar enactment and is released without any trial, loses his 
service under the government and whether such a person is entitled to any leave salary or 
                         
Now Chief Finance & Accounts Officers. 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 837 
 
 
subsistence allowance for the period he remained under detention.  As some doubts 
seemed to exist in the matter, the question has been fully considered in consultation with 
the Law Division and it has been decided that the following procedure should be adopted 
to regulate cases of detention in prison and subsequent acquittal or conviction:— 
 
(i) 
As soon as it comes to notice that an employee has been detained in 
prison, action should be taken to place him under suspension. The period 
of the employee‘s detention [should be treated as period spent under] 
committal to prison within the meaning of Article 194 C.S.R. and the pay 
and allowances during suspension should be regulated under F.R.53. 
 
(ii) 
If the employee is subsequently acquitted honourably, he should be 
reinstated forthwith.  He will be entitled to receive full salary for the entire 
period of his absence from duty under F.R. 54(a). 
 
(iii)   If on the other hand, the acquittal is not honourable, then the provision of 
F.R. 54 (b) will apply. 
 
(iv) If the employee is released from detention without any trial, it is open to 
the competent authority to take disciplinary action against him if good and 
sufficient reasons exist from such action. In that case the procedure 
prescribed in the Efficiency and Discipline Rules must be observed. 
 
(v) 
If the employee is convicted, he may be dismissed from service if his 
retention in service is not desirable.  In that case, the procedure prescribed 
in the Efficiency and Discipline Rules, need not be observed. He will be 
entitled to nothing more than the subsistence allowance up to the date of his 
dismissal from which date the pay and allowance will cease under F.R. 52. 
[Authority.-Estt. Division‘s O.M.No. F/19/11/49-Ests (SE), dated 20-12-1949]. 
29.3 
Clarification Regarding Detention of Government 
Servants Under Public Safety Act  
 
A reference is invited to the Establishment Division‘s O.M. No.F. 19/11/49-Ests 
(S.E.), dated the 20th December, 1949, and it is stated that a certain amount of confusion 
has arisen from the words ―considered as resulting from‖ which occur in item (i) of that 
Office Memorandum. These words, as they stand, are capable of being interpreted as if a 
person who is detained under the Public Safety Act will be governed by the provisions of 
Article 194, Civil Service Regulations, as it stands. The position, however, is that Article 
194 does not strictly apply to such cases but the intention is that, when a person is 
detained under the Public Safety Act, his pay and allowances should, on the analogy of 
the provisions of Article 194, be regulated as if he was committed to prison.  In order to 
make this intention clear, it has been decided that the words ―considered as resulting 
from‖ referred to above may be replaced by the words ―treated as period spent under‖. 
[Authority.-Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.27/41/52-SE-II, dated 7-12-1954]. 
                         
 Amended vide Estt. Division‘s O.M.No. 27/41/52-SE II, dated 7-12-1954.  

Page - 838             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
 
29.4 
Removal From Service as a Result  
 
of Conviction in Court of  Law 
 
  Attention is invited to the Establishment Division‘s O. M. No. 3/24/59-SE.II, 
dated 21-3-1959 (Annex).  It  is  stated  that  the  instructions  contained therein  have 
been   reviewed  in  the  Establishment   Division   and, in supersession of these instructi-
ons, it has been decided that, in future, all government servants convicted of a criminal 
charge involving moral turpitude should be dismissed from government service.  For this 
purpose, Government Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 1973 provide for 
dispensation of the normal disciplinary procedure. 
 
2. 
The Ministries and Divisions are requested to bring the above position to 
the notice of all concerned for strict compliance in future. 
[Authority.-Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.2/2/73-DI, dated 15-4-1976]. 
(ANNEX) 
[Copy of Establishment Division O.M. No. 3/24/59-SE.I, dated the 21st March, 1959]. 
 
References have been received from time to time from Ministries and Divisions 
etc. enquiring whether a government servant convicted by a court of law can be removed 
or dismissed from service or reduced in rank straightaway or it is necessary to give him a 
show cause notice before passing final orders in the matter. 
 
2. 
This question has been given due consideration in the Establishment 
Division who are of the view that, as a general principle, if a government servant is 
convicted in a court of law he does not automatically lose his employment under 
government. But if in the opinion of the authority competent to pass orders of dismissal, 
removal or reduction in rank grounds which led to his conviction are good and sufficient 
for imposing any of these penalties, that authority can pass such an order. If, however, the 
competent authority considers that a lesser penalty or no penalty at all is called for in the 
circumstances of the case (such as minor or technical nature) there is no bar to that 
authority taking a decision accordingly. 
 
3. 
If it is decided to award the penalty of dismissal, removal or reduction in 
rank it is not necessary to give a show cause notice to the person concerned vide Article 
181 (2) proviso (a) of the late Constitution or Rule 55 of the Civil Services (Classification, 
Control and Appeal) Rules [Article 177 (I) (b) of the 1962 Constitution or rule 6 of the 
Efficiency and Discipline Rules, 1960 may be referred to in the present context].The order of 
removal, dismissal or reduction can be passed by the competent authority taking into 
consideration the grounds of conduct which led to the conviction of the person concerned in the 
court of law.  The removal, dismissal or reduction in such cases takes effect from the date of 
orders and not from the date of verdict passed by the court. 
                         
Now Civil Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules,2020. 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 839 
 
 
Sl.No.30 
Strictures Passed by Courts Against Government Servants 
 
The question, whether strictures passed by courts of law against a government 
servant render him liable to departmental action, has been under consideration of the 
Establishment Division for some time. It has been held that when a court passed any 
strictures against a government servant, it should not necessarily be assumed that he is 
guilty of some misconduct or breach of rules or an act of omission or commission. The 
nature of the action to be taken should be decided after careful consideration of the facts 
and circumstances of each individual case. If the strictures are such as to merit 
disciplinary action against the government servant concerned, he should be dealt with 
departmentally in the light of the Government Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) 
Rules. No government servant should, however, be punished on the basis of the strictures 
without drawing up necessary proceedings in accordance with the aforesaid rules. An 
entry may be made in the Character Roll of the government servant concerned or a copy 
of the strictures placed therein only when specific orders are passed to that effect by the 
competent authority. In no other case, strictures should find a place in the Character Roll 
of the government servant. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 3/110/59-E.V., dated 28-4-1960]. 
 
31.1 
False or Forged Information about Educational  
Qualifications and Age and Pakistan Penal Code 
 
Government of Pakistan do not agree with the views expressed by the 
Government of East Pakistan in their letter No. 2070-GAC, dated 9th December, 1958 
that the furnishing of false information by candidates for posts in government service is 
punishable under section 177 of the Pakistan Penal Code. Section 177 of the Pakistan 
Penal Code deals with the cases of persons legally bound to furnish information to a 
public servant, whereas there is no legal obligation in the part of a candidate to furnish 
information when applying for a post in government service.  The offence of furnishing 
false information in such cases is not, therefore, punishable under section 177, but under 
section 182 of the Pakistan Penal Code. 
 
2. 
As for tampering with the date of birth as recorded in an educational 
certificate, it is considered that this amounts to forgery within the meaning of section 463 
of the Pakistan Penal Code. The forging of certificates to support false assertions of 
educational qualifications would appear to be punishable under section 465, and the use 
of forged certificates punishable under section 468 of the Pakistan Penal Code. It is 
considered that these offences, which are punishable with long periods of imprisonment, 
cannot be tried summarily for the reason that, under section 260 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, only offences punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding six 
months can be tried summarily. 
                         
Now Civil Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules,2020. 

Page - 840             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
 
3. 
In the circumstances, prosecution for the offences mentioned above should 
be restricted to cases of false information under section 182 of the Pakistan Penal Code, 
ignoring the offence of forgery where it is also present. Steps should also be taken to have 
the cases tried in a summary manner under sub-section (1) of section 260 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s Letter No.6/26/58-R, dated 20-1-1959 addressed to the [then]  
Government of East Pakistan]. 
31.2 
Anti-Corruption Measures – Government Servants to Disclose Their 
Assets/Severe Disciplinary Action for Indulging in Corrupt Practices 
 
  Government of Pakistan have recently considered certain measures for the 
elimination of corruption among government servants and have, „inter alia‟, decided as 
follows:— 
 
(a) 
that a government servant when required by government to disclose his 
assets, immovable as well as liquid, must comply; 
 
(b) 
that a government servant, who indulges in nepotism, favouritism, 
victimization and wilful abuse of office, will be liable to disciplinary action 
which may include dismissal. 
 
2. 
It is requested that the above decisions may please be brought to the notice of 
all government servants serving under the Government of Pakistan. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 4/15/53-SE II, dated 7-7-1953]. 
 
32.1 
Responsibility of Head of Department for Corruption 
within Area of his Administrative Jurisdiction  
 
 Measures undertaken to curb corruption in the police have shown appreciable 
results, and its personnel deserve to be commended, and encouraged to continue with their 
efforts in that direction. 
 
2.  Meanwhile, public complaints of corruption in several government departments 
persist, and effective steps are required to root it out. It is the bounden duty of every Head of 
Department to exercise utmost vigilance, analyse the cause, and trace the source where 
incidence of corruption occurs. 
 
3. In future, a Head of Department will bear responsibility, and be answerable for 
proven charges of corruption within the area of his administrative jurisdiction.  It is 
self-evident that corruption prevails in a department of its Head is: 
(a) 
himself corrupt, or 
(b) 
wilfully blind to corruption taking place, or 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 841 
 
 
(c) 
so inefficient that he is unable to control it. 
 
4. 
Whichever of these three reasons may be applicable, such a Head of 
Department cannot be retained in service to the detriment of government‘s objective of 
serving the people and promoting their weal and welfare. 
[Authority.- President and CMLA‘s Note No.57/1/CMLA, dated 25-9-1978]. 
 
32.2 
Co-operation with Investigating Officers 
of the Federal Investigating Agency 
 
The New Federal Investigation Agency has been constituted by the Government 
of Pakistan for the investigation of cases of bribery and corruption involving persons 
serving in connection with the affairs of the Centre. The cases of corruption usually 
relate to the functions of the public servants concerned and involve the examination of 
official record for coming to a conclusion whether an offence has been committed or not. 
Instances have come to notice that in some cases when the Investigating Officers of the 
Special Police Establishment approached the departments for papers relevant to the 
cases under investigation, the officers concerned delayed handing over of papers on one 
pretext or the other and in some cases, even refused to hand over the documents. They 
were perhaps not aware that under section 94 of the Criminal Procedure Code, an 
Investigating Officer is empowered to demand the production of any paper connected 
with the offence, the investigation of which is being conducted by him and omission to 
comply is punishable under section 175 of the Pakistan Penal Code. Even otherwise, it is 
the duty of each public servant to assist the anti-corruption agencies in their arduous task 
of eradicating corruption. The responsibility of the Heads of Departments in this matter 
has also been emphasized in this Ministry‘s Office Memorandum No. 1/8/67-SP (P), 
dated the 20th September, 1967. Delay in the investigation of corruption cases is 
detrimental to the prosecution and goes in favour of the accused who gets a chance to 
tamper with the record and win over the witnesses before the police can examine them. It 
is, therefore, requested that suitable instructions may be issued to all concerned 
impressing upon them the need for prompt handing over of the requisite record to the 
Investigating Officers and the desirability of extending full co-operation to them in the 
investigation of corruption cases. 
[Authority.- Interior Division‘s O.M. No.1/8/68-SP(P), dated 24-7-1968]. 
 
32.3 
Instructions Regarding Investigations by 
the Federal Investigation Agency into Cases 
of Bribery and Corruption 
 
With the coming into force of the F.I.A. Act No. VIII of 1975, the Special Police 
Establishment stands converted into the Federal Investigation Agency. Instructions 
regarding investigations by the Federal Investigation Agency into the conduct of cases of 
bribery and corruption have, therefore, been drawn upon the lines of the former instructions 
regarding investigations by the Special Police Establishment with necessary modifications, and 
                         
Federal. 
DG,FIA. 

Page - 842             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
a copy thereof is forwarded herewith (Annex) for information and guidance. 
[Authority.- Interior Division‘s O.M. No. 1/21/74-SP (P), dated 5-3-1975]. 
(ANNEX) 
 
Instructions Regarding Investigation of Cases of Bribery and Corruption by the 
Federal Investigation Agency. 
Note.— The expression ―Competent Authority‖ in these instructions means the Anti-
Corruption Council at the Centre  in the case of an officer of grade 17 and 
above who is serving in connection with the affairs of the Federal Government, 
is not removable from his office save by or with the sanction of the Federal 
Government and, in any other case, the Interior Division. 
 
1. 
The Federal Investigation Agency may start an investigation either on its 
own initiative or on receipt of a complaint or information, oral or written. 
 
2. 
When the identity of the complainant is not known, as will happen when 
the complainant is anonymous or pseudonymous, the Agency, shall not register a case 
unless they are able to obtain, by the preliminary enquiry, independent corroboration of 
the allegations made in the complaint. 
 
3. 
When the identity of the complainant is known, the Agency shall ascertain 
from him full facts in support of his allegations and shall, after doing so, proceed in the 
manner laid down in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
4. 
If the preliminary enquiry, referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 above, shows 
that there is reason to suspect the commission of an offence which the Agency is 
empowered to investigate, the Agency shall at once send a brief statement of the case to the 
competent authority and seek its concurrence to the registration of the case.  On receipt of this 
concurrence, the Ministry or Department under which the government servant concerned is 
serving shall be informed of the registration of the case: 
 
Provided that a reference to the competent authority shall not be necessary to the 
case of those government servants who are not governed by section 197 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898): 
 
Provided further that the Agency may register a case against any government 
servant at once, if for reasons to be recorded, it considers that delay in investigation will, 
or is likely to, result in the disappearance of, or in tampering with, the evidence or in 
immediate loss to government. When registration is effected without prior reference, 
under this proviso, a report of the action taken, alongwith reasons thereof, shall be 
                         
 Federal Government. 
 BPS. 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 843 
 
 
forwarded by the Agency at the earliest opportunity to the competent authority. 
 
5. 
Before the registration of a case, all inquiries shall be secret, as far as 
possible.  After a case has been registered, investigation shall proceed with care and 
discretion and no undue publicity shall be given to it. Special care shall be taken to ensure 
that no unnecessary damage is caused to the prestige, reputation and dignity of the 
government servant involved in the case. 
 
6. 
At the close of investigation into cases for which sanction for prosecution 
is required under section 197 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898), 
or under sub-section (5) of section 6 of the Pakistan Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1958 
(XL of 1958). The Agency shall submit to the Anti-Corruption Council, in the case of 
officers of grade* 17 and above, as per instructions noted under (a) below, and to the 
Interior Division, in the case of other officers as per instructions noted under (b) below, 
full facts of the case, the opinion of the legal adviser, the draft sanction order, a 
charge-sheet and a brief statement of allegations to be supplied to the accused government 
servant. 
(a)   In cases registered against officers of *Grade 17 and above, explanation of 
the accused officer, giving him 15 days time will be obtained by the 
Deputy Director of the Agency before submission of the case to the 
Anti-Corruption Council for decision regarding disposal of the case viz. 
charge-sheet for trial or departmental action or dropping the case. The 
Anti-Corruption Council will take into consideration the explanation of the 
accused in taking decision regarding disposal of the case. The Secretary of 
the Ministry concerned, in which the accused officer serves, if he is not a 
member of the Anti-Corruption Council, will be co-opted as a member of 
the Council while deciding the case.  If charge-sheet for trial in court is 
recommended by the Anti-Corruption Council, Interior Division will 
accord sanction for prosecution, without further reference to the Ministry 
concerned to obtain explanation of the accused, on the basis of the 
decision of the Anti-Corruption Council. 
(b)   In the case of officers of Grade* 16 and below, the Interior Division shall 
communicate the full facts of the case to the Ministry under whom the 
government servant concerned is employed and they shall supply to the 
government servant concerned a copy of the charge-sheet and the brief 
statement of allegations furnished by the Agency and give him an 
opportunity to submit within 15 days of its receipt a statement in writing to 
show cause why he should not be prosecuted in a court of law or otherwise 
proceeded against: 
 
     Provided that the giving of an opportunity to the government 
servant concerned to submit a statement in writing shall, in no case, be in 
                         
*BPS. 

Page - 844             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
the nature of a departmental enquiry or proceedings. The intention is that 
his statement should be on record when taking a final decision before 
according sanction for prosecution. 
 
7. 
In all cases, referred to the Anti-Corruption Council, under para 6, the 
following procedure for obtaining the explanation etc., of the accused officer shall be 
observed before seeking permission for registration of a case or open enquiry from the 
Anti-Corruption Council:- 
 
(1) 
Explanation of an accused officer shall be obtained before permission for 
open enquiry is sought by the Federal Investigation Agency, provided 
there be no difficulty in seizing documents during confidential enquiry and 
there is no apprehensions for disappearance of material evidence; 
 
(2) 
Officers of the Federal Investigation Agency will be able to seize documents 
during preliminary confidential enquiry as there is no legal bar to it; 
 
(3) 
Explanation of the accused officers should be obtained before seeking 
permission for registration of a case against him.  This will be done by the 
Deputy Director of the Federal Investigation Agency. Questions asked and 
replies furnished by the officer whose conduct is under enquiry shall 
invariably be sent to the Secretary of the Ministry concerned under which 
the accused officer serves, through the Director General, Federal 
Investigation Agency; and 
 
(4) 
In each case, explanation shall be obtained within 15 days. 
 
8. 
The Ministry concerned to whom reference is made under para 6 (b) shall 
communicate their recommendations along with the statement of the government servant 
concerned to the Interior Division within one month of its receipt. 
 
9. 
 If it is decided to prosecute in a court of law a person who is serving in 
connection with the affairs of the Federal Government or is not removable from his office save 
by or with the sanction of the Federal Government, the sanction for his prosecution under 
section 197 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, or sub-section (5) of section 6 of the 
Pakistan Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1958 (XL of 1958) as the case may be, shall be issued 
forthwith by the Interior Division. 
 
10. 
If it is decided to take departmental action against the government servant, the 
necessary action shall be taken by the authority under whom the government servant is serving. 
The agency shall supply to the Ministry or Department under which the government servant 
concerned is employed, all materials required for the departmental enquiry and thereafter that 
Ministry or Department may avail of the services of the whole-time Enquiry Officers of the 
Interior Division in accordance with the provisions of their Memo. No. 2/7/67-SP (P), dated the 
13th March, 1963. The Ministry or Department, as the case may be, shall intimate the result of 
the enquiry to the Interior Division and to the Federal Investigation Agency. 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 845 
 
 
 
11. 
In case where departmental action is taken, the Interior Division may call 
for records of the departmental proceedings. 
 
12. 
When sanction for prosecution is issued, the government servant 
concerned shall be placed under suspension, unless this action has been taken at an earlier 
stage. 
 
33.1 The Federal Investigation Agency, Act 1974  
 
 
(Act VIII of 1975) 
 
[Dated: 13-1-1975] 
 
An Act to provide for the constitution of a Federal Investigation Agency. 
 
Whereas it is expedient to provide for the constitution of a Federal Investigation 
Agency for the investigation of certain offences committed in connection with matters 
concerning the Federal Government, and for matters connected therewith; 
 
It is hereby enacted as follows:— 
 
1. 
Short title, extent and commencement.— (1) This Act may be called the 
Federal Investigation Agency Act, 1974. 
 
(2) 
It extends to the whole of Pakistan and also applies to all citizens of 
Pakistan and public servants, wherever they may be. 
 
(3) 
It shall come into force at once. 
 
2. 
Definition.— In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject 
or context,— 
 
(a) 
―Agency‖ means the Federal Investigation Agency constituted under 
section 3; 
 
(b) 
―Code‖ means the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898); 
 
(c) 
―Director-General‖ means the Director-General of the Agency; 
 
(d) 
―Provincial Police‖ means the Police constituted by a Provincial Government 
under the Police Act, 1861 (V of 1861); 
 
(e) 
―Public servant‖ means a public servant as defined in section 21 of the 
Pakistan Penal Code (Act XLV of 1860), and includes an employee of any 
corporation or other body or organization set up, controlled or 
administered by or under the authority of the Federal Government; 
 
(f) 
―Special Police‖ means the Pakistan Special Police Establishment 
constituted under the Pakistan Special Police Establishment Ordinance, 

Page - 846             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
1948 (VII of 1948); 
 
(g) 
―Specified persons‖ means the persons who were appointed to posts in or 
under a Provincial Police in pursuance of Article 3 of the Special Police 
and Provincial Police (Amalgamation) Order, 1962 (P.O. No.1 of 1962); 
and 
 
(h)  ―Rule‖ means rules made under this Act. 
 
3. 
Constitution of the Agency.— (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
any other law for the time being in force, the Federal Government may constitute an 
Agency to be called the Federal Investigation Agency for inquiry into, and investigation 
of, the offences specified in the Schedule, including an attempt or conspiracy to commit, 
and abetment of, any such offence. 
 
(2)  The Agency shall consist of a Director-General to be appointed by the 
Federal Government and such number of other officers as the Federal Government may, 
from time to time, appoint to be members of the Agency. 
 
4.  
Superintendence and administration of the Agency.—(1) The 
Superintendence of the Agency shall vest in the Federal Government. 
 
(2)  The administration of the Agency shall vest in the Director General who 
shall exercise in respect of the Agency such of the powers of an Inspector General of 
Police under the Police Act, 1861 (V of 1861), as may be prescribed by rules. 
 
5. 
Powers of the members of the Agency.— (1) Subject to any order which 
the Federal Government may make in this behalf, the members of the Agency shall, for 
the purpose of an inquiry or investigation under this Act, have throughout Pakistan such 
powers, including powers relating to search, arrest of persons and seizure of property, and such 
duties, privileges and liabilities as the officers of a Provincial Police have in relation to the 
investigation of offences under the Code or any other law for the time being in force. 
 
(2) 
Subject to rules, if any, a member of the Agency not below the rank of a 
Sub-Inspector may, for the purposes of any inquiry or investigation under this Act, exercise 
any of the powers of an officer incharge of a Police-station in any area in which he is for the 
time being and, when so exercising such powers, shall be deemed to be an officer-incharge of a 
police-station discharging his functions as such within the limits of his station. 
 
(3) 
Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1) and 
sub-section (2), any member of the Agency not below the rank of a Sub-Inspector 
authorized by the Director- General in this behalf may arrest without warrant any person 
who has committed, or against whom a reasonable suspicion exists that he has committed, 
any of the offences referred to in sub-section (1) of section 3. 
 
(4) 
For the purpose of the exercise by the members of the Agency of the 
powers of an officer-in-charge of a police-station, ―Police-station‖ includes any place 
declared, generally or specially, by the Federal Government to be a police- station within 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 847 
 
 
the meaning of the Code. 
 
(5) 
If, in the opinion of a member of the Agency conducting an investigation, 
any property which is the subject matter of the investigation is likely to be removed, 
transferred or otherwise disposed of before an order of the appropriate authority for its 
seizure is obtained, such member may, by order in writing, direct the owner or any person 
who is, for the time being, in possession thereof not to remove, transfer or otherwise 
dispose of such property in any manner except with the previous permission of that 
member and such order shall be subject to any order made by the court having jurisdiction 
in the matter. 
 
(6) 
Any contravention of an order made under sub-section (5) shall be 
punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a time which may extend to one year, or with 
fine, or with both. 
5-A. Certain Officers of the Agency deemed to be public Prosecutors.—
 Notwithstanding anything contained in any order law for the time being in force the 
Assistant Directors (Legal) and the Deputy Directors (Law) of the Agency shall be 
deemed to be Public Prosecutors and shall be competent to institute and conduct any 
proceedings in cases sent up for trial by the Agency in the Special Courts constituted 
under any law and the courts subordinate to the High Court. (Added through FIA 
(Amendment) Ordinance 2002) 
 
6. 
Power to amend the Schedule.— The Federal Government may, by 
notification in the official Gazette, amend the Schedule so as to add any entry thereto or 
modify or omit any entry therein. 
 
7. 
Delegations of powers.— The Director General may by order in writing, 
direct that all or any of his powers under this Act or the rules shall, subject to such 
conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order, be exercisable also by any member of 
the Agency so specified. 
 
8. 
Indemnity.— No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie 
against the Federal Government, any member of the Agency or any other person 
exercising any power or performing any function under this Act or the rules for anything 
which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules. 
 
9. 
Power to make rules.— (1) The Federal Government may, by notification 
in the official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
 
(2) 
In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) 
the terms and conditions of service of the Director-General and other 
members of the Agency and the qualifications for recruitment to various posts; 
(b) 
the powers and functions of the members of the Agency in relation to the 

Page - 848             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
conduct of inquiries and investigations; 
(c) 
the nature and extent of the assistance which the Agency may provide to 
Provincial investigating agencies; 
(d) 
the powers of the Inspector General of Police under the Police Act, 1861 
(V of 1861), which shall be exercisable by the Director- General; and 
(e) 
the manner in which rewards may be given to the members of the Agency 
or of the public for rendering commendable services. 
 
10. 
Repeal.— (1) The Pakistan Special Police Establishment Ordinance, 1948 
(VIII of 1948), and the Special Police and Provincial Police (Amalgamation) Order, 1962 
(P. 0. No. I of 1962), hereinafter referred to respectively as the said Ordinance and the 
said Order, are hereby repealed. 
 
(2) 
Upon the repeal of the said Ordinance,- 
(a) 
all persons who were members of the Special Police immediately before 
such repeal, including the specified persons, shall stand transferred to the 
Agency and shall, subject to sub-section (5), be entitled to the same terms 
and conditions to which they were entitled immediately before such repeal; 
and 
(b) 
any inquiry or investigation pending with the Special Police immediately 
before such repeal shall continue to be conducted by the Agency. 
 
(3) 
Notwithstanding the repeal of the said Order, but subject to sub-section (4), 
every specified person shall continue to be appointed in or under the Provincial Police in 
or under which he was holding a post immediately before the commencement of this Act. 
 
(4) 
On the recommendation of the Director-General, and with the concurrence 
of the Provincial Government concerned, the Federal Government may direct that such of 
the Specified persons referred to in sub-section (3) as may within thirty days of the 
commencement of this Act express their willingness to serve in or under the Agency shall 
be appointed to posts in or under the Agency. 
 
(5) 
 A specified person referred to in clause (a) of sub- section(2), and a 
person in respect of whom a direction is issued under sub-section (4) shall, upon the 
repeal of the said Ordinance or, as the case may be, the issue of such direction, cease to 
hold a post in or under the Provincial Police concerned and shall be entitled to the same 
terms and conditions of service to which he was entitled immediately before such repeal 
or the issue of such direction. 
 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 849 
 
 
THE SCHEDULE 
 
(1) 
Offences punishable under sections a[120-B, 121,122, 123, 123-A, 124, 
124-A], g[161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 165-A, 168, 169], d[175, 182, 183, 186, 187, 188, 
189], c[201], e[216], b[217, 218], e[223], d[224, 225], e[225-A], b[245], b[255, 256, 257, 
258, 259, 260, 261, 263], f[295-A, 295-C, 298, 298-A], a[300, 301, 302, 324, 332, 333, 
334, 335, 336, 337, 337-A, 337-B, 337-C, 337-D, 337-E, 337-F], d[342, 348], b[353] 
a[365-A] b[366-B], d[383], b[402-A, 402-B, 402-C, 403, 404], i[406], c[407,408], h[409], 
c[411,418,419,], i[420], a[435, 436, 440], k[462A, 462B, 462C, 462D, 462E, 462F], 
l[462H,462I, 462J, 462K,462L,462M] d[466], c[467], i[468,471], c[472], d[473, 474, 475, 
476], b[477-A, 489-A, 489-B, 489-C, 489-D, 489-E], j[489-F], d[499, 500, 501, 502, 506, 
507], of the Pakistan Penal Code (Act XLV of 1860) 
[TOTAL = 115] 
m[1-A] Section 25-D & Section 29 of Telegraphic Act,1885. 
b[2]    
Offences punishable under the Explosive Substance Act,1908(VI of 1908). 
b[3]     
Offences punishable under the Official Secret Act,1923 (XIX of 1923). 
b[4]    
Offences punishable under the Foreigners Act, 1946 (XXXI of 1946). 
b[5]   
Offences punishable under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 (II of 1947). 
b[6]    
Offences punishable under the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947. 
b[7]     
Offences punishable under the Import and Export (Control) Act, 1950(XXXIX 
of 1950). 
b[8]     
Offences punishable under Banking Companies Ordinance, 1962 (LVII of 1962). 
b[9]     
Offences punishable under the Pakistan Arms Ordinance, 1965 (W.P. Ord XX of 
1965). 
b[10]     Offences punishable under Section the 156 of the Customs Act, 1969 (IV of 1969). 
b[11]  Offences punishable under the Foreign Exchange Repatriation Regulation, 1972. 
b[12]    offences punishable under the Foreign Assets (Declaration) Regulation 1972. 
b[13] 
Offences punishable under the National Registration Act,1973 (LVI of 1973). 
 
(Omitted). 
b[14]    Offences punishable under the High Treason (Punishment) Act, 1973 (LXVIII of 
 
1973). 
b[15]     Offences punishable under the Prevention of Anti-National Activities Act,1974 
 
(VII of 1974). 
b[16]     Offences punishable under the Banks (Nationalization) Act, 1974 (XIX of  1974). 
b[17]     Offences punishable under the Passport Act, 1974 (XX of 1974). 
b[18]     Offences punishable under the Drugs Act, 1976 (XXXI of 1976). 
b[19]     Offences punishable under Emigration Ordinance, 1979 (XVIII of 1979). 
b[20]     Offences punishable under the exit from Pakistan (Control) Ordinance, 
 
1981(XLVI of 1981). 
n[21]  Offences punishable under the Anti-Terrorism Act, 1997(XXVII of 1997) to the 
 
extent of dealing with cases which:— 

Page - 850             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
       
(a) 
have Inter-provincial scope, or 
        
(b) 
entrusted to the Agency by the Federal Government. 
O[22]    Offences punishable under the Prevention & Control of Human Trafficking 
 
Ordinance 2002. (Repealed) 
p[23] 
Offences punishable under the Pakistan Telecommunication (Re-organization) 
 
Act, 1996 (XVII of 1996) 
q[24]      Offences punishable under the National Database and Registration Authority 
 
Ordinance, 2002. 
r[25]  
Offences Punishable under Section 36 & 37 of the Electronic Transmission 
 
Ordinance, 2002 (L1 of 2002). (Omitted)   
s[26]     Offences punishable under the Copyright Ordinance, 1962 (XXXIV of 1962). 
t[27]     Offences punishable under the Prevention of Electronic Crimes Ordinance,2007 
 
(LXXII of 2007). 
u[28] 
Offences punishable under the Anti-Money Laundering Ordinance,2007 
 
(XI.V of 2007). 
v[29]     Offences punishable under the Electricity Act, 1910 (IX of 1910). 
w[30] 
Offences punishable under the Protection of Pakistan 1Act,2014 (X of 2014). 
x[31] 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
l[32] 
Offences punishable under Prevention of Electric Crimes Act,2016 (XL of  2016). 
y[33] 
Transportation of Human Organs and Tissues Act,2010 (VI of 2010). 
                         
a. S.R.O. 704(I)/2004 dated 18 August,2004, [693 (2004)/Ex.Gaz.] [F.No. 4/14/2003-POLL (2)]. 
b. S.R.O. 826(I)/97 dated 20 September,1997, (No. 1/18/97-FIA.I.). 
c. S.R.O. 113(I)/2002 dated 18 February,2002, [128(2002)/Ex.Gaz.]. 
d. S.R.O. 381(I)/2012 dated 18 April,2012, [2428 (2012)/Ex.Gaz.] [No. 7/13/2012-FIA.]. 
e. S.R.O. 31 (KE)/15, dated 22 December,2014, [No.1/12/2014-FIA]. 
f. S.R.O. 620(I)/2018, dated 18 May,2018, [5925 (2018)/Ex. Gaz.] [No. 1/2/2017-FIA]. 
g. [Entry 161,162,163,164,165,165-A, 168,169 omitted by S.R.O. 702(I)2004 dated 16-08-2004 PLD 2004 
Cent.St. Sup.649 Inst. By S.R.O.1097(I)/2008, dated 24-10-2008, PLD 2004-2009 Supp. Fed. St.125]. 
h. Section 409 omitted by 702(I) 2004 dated 16-08-2004, PLD 2004 Cent St. Sup. 649 Inst. By S.R.O 
1097(I)/2008, dated 24-10-2008, PLD 2004-2009 Supp. Fed. St. 125. 
i. S.R.O. 237(I)/98 dated 10 April, 1998, [No. 1/18/97-FIA]. 
j. S.R.O. 977 (I)/2003 dated 9 October,2003, [5187 (2003)/Ex.Gaz.] [F.No. 1/18/97-FIA.I.] 
k. S.R.O. 67(KE)/2013 dated 03 September, 2013, [F.No. 1/4/2013-FIA]. 
l. S.R.O. 1047(I)/2016 dated 10 November,2016 [4012(2016)/Ex.Gaz.] [1/2/2016-(FIA).] 
m. S.R.O. 1231(I)/2012 dated 1st October, 2012, [3038 (2012)/Ex.Gaz.] [F.No. 7/13/2012-FIA.] 
n. S.R.O. 157(I)/2002 dated 19 March, 2002, [215 (2002)/Ex-Gaz.] 
o. S.R.O. 741(I)/2002 dated 26 October,2002, [1249(2002)/Ex.Gaz.] [F.No. 1/18/97-FIA.I.] 
p. S.R.O. 853(I)/2002 dated 28 November,2002, [1411 (2002)/Ex.Gaz.] [F.No. 1/12/2002-FIA.I] 
q. S.R.O. 549(I)/2003 dated 18 June,2003, [4897 (2003)/Ex.Gaz.] [F.No. 1/11/2002-FIA.I.] 
r. S.R.O. 1050(I)/2003 dated 15 November,2003, [F.No. 1/18/97-FIA.I.] 
s. S.R.O. 321(I)/2005 dated 19 April, 2005, [2800 (2005)/Ex.Gaz.] [F.No. 1(I)/2005-FIA.I.] 
t. S.R.O. 206(I)/2008 dated 04 March,2008 [2213 (2008)/Ex.Gaz.] 
u. S.R.O. 1097(I)/2008 dated 21 October,2008, [3120(2008)/Ex.Gaz.] [F.No. 1/154/2001/FIA] 
v. S.R.O. 1/4/2013-FIA dated 24 July,2013 [ F.No. 1/3/2013-FIA, dated 16 July,2013] 
w. S.R.O. 5(KE)/2016 dated 7 January,2016, [F.No. 1/5/2015-(FIA)] 
x. Entry No. 31 is laying vacant at present.  
y. S.R.O. 353(I)/2017 dated 20 May, 2017 [706(2017)/Ex. Gaz.], [N. 1/2017-FIA]        

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 851 
 
 
33.2 Setting up of Anti-Corruption Council  
 
at the Centre to Deal with Cases of  
 
Class I Officers 
 
It has been decided to set-up an Anti-Corruption Council at the Centre to deal 
with cases of corruption against Class I Officers investigated by the Special Police 
Establishment.  The composition etc., of the Council will be as follows:- 
 
(1)  Composition.- The Council will be composed as follows:— 
 
(i) 
Secretary, Cabinet Secretariat  
Member 
 
    
(Establishment Division). 
 
(ii) 
Secretary, Ministry of Home   
Member 
 
         and Kashmir Affairs  
 
     
(Home Affairs Division***). 
 
(iii)    Secretary, Ministry of Law   
Member 
  
(iv) Inspector-General, Special  
Secretary 
 
 
Police Establishment.  
Note.-  (a)  The senior most of the three permanent members will act as the Chairman 
of the Council. 
 
(b)  The Council will co-opt the Secretary of the Ministry concerned, the case of 
whose official comes up for decision. 
 
(2) 
Jurisdiction.-The Council will deal with cases of corruption  against:- 
 
 (i)  All Class I Officers** of the Central* Government; 
 
 (ii) Officers of the Provincial Governments or of the corporate bodies and 
other organizations set-up by the Central* Government where the 
authority competent to remove the accused from service is the President;  
 
 (iii)   Members of All Pakistan Services@ or of Central Class I@@ Services 
or holders of Class I Posts under the *Central Government who were 
at the time of the commission of the offence serving in connection 
with the affairs of a Province. 
                         
 Federal Government. 
 Officers in BPS 17 to 22. 
*** Interior Division. 
@ All Pakistan Unified Grades (APUG): Secretariat Group, Pakistan Administrative Services (PAS) and Police 
Service of Pakistan . 
@@ BPS 17-22. 

Page - 852             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
 
(3) 
Functions.- The functions of the Council will be as follows:- 
 (i) 
To permit institution of open enquiry by the Special Police 
Establishment. 
 (ii) To permit registration of a case by the Special Police Establishment, 
for formal investigation. 
 (iii)  To consider the enquiry/investigation report and recommend, as the 
case may be, 
 
(a) 
prosecution of the accused, or 
 
(b) 
departmental action, or 
 
(c) 
dropping of the case, or 
 
(d) 
further enquiry/investigation. 
[ Note.-  
Recommendations of the Council shall have the same sanctity and shall be 
given the same weight as the recommendations of the Central* Public Service 
Commission]. 
[Reference Interior Division‟s O. M. No. 1/9/67-SP (P), dated 29-6-1968]. 
 
33.3 
Correspondence with the F.I.A 
 
The Federal Investigation Agency (formerly Pakistan Special Police 
Establishment) is authorized to undertake the investigation of crime under the various 
laws included in the Schedule to the F.I.A. Act, 1974 (VIII of 1975) (Annex) to. As such, 
all Ministries  and  Divisions including their subordinate and attached  offices, and for 
that matter an agency or individual, can directly bring to the notice of the Circle and 
Branch Offices of the F.I.A. (located in various cities), any incidence or alleged incidence 
of a crime, under the law included in the said Schedule. However, while doing so they are 
requested to endorse a copy of their communication to the Director General, Federal 
Investigation Agency, to help facilitate a quick disposal of the reference. 
 
2. 
References regarding important matters should, however, continue to be 
addressed to the Interior Division. 
[Authority.- Interior Division‘s O.M. No.8/9/74-Admn.IV., dated 6-3-1975]. 
                         
* Federal. 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 853 
 
 
Sl.No. 34  
National Accountability ORDINANCE NO. XVIII OF 1999 
An Ordinance to provide for the setting up of a National Accountability Bureau so as to 
eradicate corruption and corrupt practices and hold accountable all those persons 
accused of such practices and matters ancillary thereto; 
WHEREAS it is expedient and necessary to provide for effective measures for 
the detection, investigation, prosecution and speedy disposal of cases involving 
corruption, corrupt practices,1[misuse or abuse] of power 2[or authority], misappropriation of 
property, taking of kickbacks, commissions and for matters connected and ancillary or 
incidental thereto; 
AND WHEREAS there is an emergent need for the recovery of outstanding 
amounts from those persons who have committed default in the repayment of amounts to 
Banks, Financial Institutions, 3[Governmental agencies] and other agencies; 
AND WHEREAS there is a grave and urgent need for the recovery of state 
money and other assets from those persons who have misappropriated or removed 
such 2[money or] assets through corruption, corrupt practices and misuse of power*4 or 
authority; 
5[AND WHEREAS there is an urgent need to educate the society about the 
causes and effects of corruption and corrupt practices and to implement policies and 
procedures for the prevention of corruption in the society;] 
6[AND WHEREAS there is an increased international awareness that nations 
should co-operate in combating corruption and seek, obtain or give mutual legal 
assistance in matters concerning corruption and for matters connected, ancillary or 
incidental thereto;] 
AND WHEREAS it is necessary that a National Accountability Bureau be set up 
so as to achieve the above aims; 
AND WHEREAS the National Assembly and the Senate stand suspended in 
pursuance of the Proclamation of the fourteenth day of October, 1999, and the Provisional 
Constitution Order No.1 of 1999, as amended; 
                         
 The NAB Ordinance, 1999 and all rules, notifications and orders made or issued hereunder have been adapted 
and applied in the Northern Areas. See SRO-467(1)/2000, dated 28-6-2000. 
1Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) ordinance. 2002(133 of 2002), s.2, for ―misuse/abuse‖. 
2Ins. ibid., 
3Subs.ibid., for ―government.‖ 
4The word and oblique ―and/‖ omitted ibid., 
5New paragraph ins. ibid., 
6New paragraph ins. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance. 2001 (35 of 2001), s.2. 

Page - 854             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
AND WHEREAS the President is satisfied that circumstances 
exist which  [render] it necessary to take immediate action; 
NOW 
THEREFORE, 
in pursuance of the aforesaid 
Proclamation and Provisional Constitutional Order as well as Order No. 
9 of 1999, and in exercise of all powers enabling him in that behalf, the 
President of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan is pleased to make and 
promulgate the following Ordinance:- 
1.  
This 
Ordinance 
may 
be 
called 
the 
National 
Accountability 3*Ordinance, 1999 (No. XVIII of 1999). 
2.  
This Ordinance shall come into force at once and shall 
be deemed to have come into force from the 1st day of January 1985. 
3. 
 4[The provisions of this Ordinance shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being 
in force.] 
4.  
It extends to the whole of Pakistan and shall apply to all 
persons in Pakistan, 5[all citizens of Pakistan] and persons who are or 
have been in the service of Pakistan wherever they may be, including 
areas which are part of Federally and Provincially Administered Tribal 
Areas. 
5.-(a) ―Accused‖ shall include a person in respect of whom 
there are reasonable grounds to believe, 6[that he] is or has been 
involved in the commission of any offence7[triable] under this 
Ordinance 8*or is subject of an investigation 9[or] inquiry by the 
National Accountability Bureau, or 10[any other agency authorised by 
the National Accountability Bureau in this regard under this 
Ordinance.] 
 
 
 
                         
Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance. 2002 ( 133 of 2002). S.2, for ―renders‖. 
2Subs. ibid., s.3, for ―Title‖. 
3The word ―Bureau‖, omitted ibid. 
4Subs. and shall be deemed always to have been so subs, by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) 
Ordinance, 1999 (19 of 1999), s.2, for the original section 3, 
5Ins. by Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s, 4, 
6 Subs. ibid., s5, for ―,‖. 
7Ins. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2000 (4 of 2000), S.2, 
8The word and oblique ―and/‖ omitted by ords. No. 1336 of 2002, s.5, 
9Subs. ibid., for ―i‖ 
10Subs. ibid., for ―Concerned Agency‖. 
 2 Short Title 
Commencement 
Ordinance to 
Override  other  
laws 
Application 
Definitions: 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 855 
 
 
(b) 
―Appropriate Government‖ means in relation to any person serving in 
connection with the affairs of the Federation, including any person 
employed by a corporation, body, financial institution, bank, authority 
undertaking or any other organization set up, controlled or administered by 
or under the authority of the Federal Government, [the Federal 
Government and in other cases,] the Provincial Government 2[or the local 
government] concerned. 
(c) 
―Assets‖ means any property owned, controlled by or belonging to any 
accused, whether directly or indirectly, or held benami in the name of his 
spouse or relatives or associates, whether within or outside Pakistan 3* 
which 4[he] cannot reasonably account 2[for], or for which 4[he]cannot 
prove payment of full and lawful consideration. 
(d) 
―Associates‖ means— 
(i)  
any 5[person] who is or has been managing the affairs 6[of] or 
keeping accounts 7[for]the accused or who enjoys or has enjoyed any 
benefit from the assets. 
 
 
8* * * 
(ii)  any association of persons, body of individuals, partnership 9[firm] or 
private limited10[company] within the meaning of Companies 
Ordinance 1984, of which 11[the accused] is or has been a member, 
partner or director or which 12[has] been promoted, floated, 
established or run by the 13[accused, whether singly or jointly, with 
other persons.] 
 
14[(iii)  a trustee of any trust declared by the accused, or of which the 
accused is also a trustee or a beneficiary; and] 
 
 
 
                         
 subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Admt.) Ordinance, 2002 (133   of  2002), s.5 for ―or‖. 
2Ins. ibid., 
3The comma and word for ―, for‖ omitted ibid., 
4Subs. ibid., for ―they‖ 
5Subs. ibid., for ―individual‖. 
6Subs. ibid., ―for‖. 
7Subs. ibid., ―of‖. 
8The words ―referred to above‖ omitted ibid., 
9Subs. ibid., for ―firms‖. 
10Subs. ibid., for ―Companies‖. 
11Subs. ibid., ―such a person‖. 
12Subs. ibid., for ―have‖, 
13Subs. ibid., for ―same group of Persons‖. 
14Subs.ibid., for clause (iii). 

Page - 856             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
 
[(iv)  a benamidar]. 
 
2[(da) ―benamidar‖ means any person who ostensibly holds or is in 
possession or custody of any property of an accused on his behalf for 
the benefit and enjoyment of the accused;] 
(e) 
―Chairman National Accountability Bureau‖ means a person who is 
appointed as such by the President 3*** of Pakistan as mentioned in 
section 6 (b) hereafter; 
(f)        ‖Code‖ means the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898; 
 
4[(fa) ―Conciliation Committee‖ means the Conciliation Committee 
constituted under section 25A;] 
 
5[(g) ―Court‖ means an Accountability Court which shall consist of a 
Judge who shall be appointed by the President of Pakistan, in 
consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court 6[of the 
Province] concerned, 7 *** on such terms and conditions as may be 
determined by the President;] 
 
8[(h) ―Judge‖ means a Judge of a Court who shall be a serving District 
and Sessions Judge qualified to be appointed as Judge of the High 
Court and includes a Judge, whether serving or retired District and 
Sessions Judge, who was appointed Judge of a Court before the 
commencement of the National Accountability Bureau (Amendment) 
Ordinance, 2001;] 
 
9[(j) ‖Deputy Chairman National Accountability Bureau‖ means the 
person 
appointed 
as 
Deputy 
Chairman 
of 
the 
National 
Accountability Bureau by the President;] 
(k) 
―National Accountability Bureau‖ means the Bureau set up and 
notified under this Ordinance, (hereinafter 10[referred to] as NAB); 
 
                         
 Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2002 (133 of  2002), s.5, for ―clause (iv)‖. 
2New clause (da) ins.ibid., 
3The words ―of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan‖ omitted ibid., 
4New clause (fa) ins. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2000 (4 of 2000), s.2. 
5Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2001 (35 of 2001)s.3, for clause (g) which 
was previously amended by  Ord. No. 24 of 2000, s.2, for original cl. (g). 
6Ins by Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s.5. 
7Certain words omitted ibid., 
8Subs. by Ord. No. 35 of 2001, S.3, for clause (h). 
9Subs. by Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s.5, for clause (j), which was previously amended by Ord. No. 24 of 2000, s. 
2, for ―Chief Executive‖. 
10Subs. ibid., ―known‖. 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 857 
 
 
(l) 
‖Freezing‖ includes attachment, sealing, [prohibiting], holding, 
controlling 2* or managing any property either through a Receiver or 
otherwise as may be directed by the 3* Court or Chairman NAB, and 
in case it is deemed necessary the disposal thereof, by sale through 
auction or negotiation subject to confirmation by the Court or by 
Chairman 4[NAB] as the case maybe after public notice. 
(m) ―Holder of public office‖ means a person who- 
(i) 
has been President of Pakistan or the Governor of a Province.  
(ii)     is, or has been the Prime Minister, Chairman Senate, Speaker of 
the National Assembly, Deputy Speaker National Assembly, 
Federal Minister, Minister of State, Attorney General and other 
Law Officer appointed under the Central Law Officers Ordinance, 
1970 (VII of 1970), Advisor to the Prime Minister, Special 
Assistant to the Prime Minister, Federal Parliamentary Secretary, 
Member 
of 
Parliament, 
Auditor 
General, 
Political 
Secretary, 5** Consultant to the Prime Minister and holds or has 
held a post or office with the rank or status of a Federal Minister or 
Minister of State;  
(iii)    is, or has been, the Chief Minister, Speaker Provincial Assembly, 
Deputy Speaker Provincial Assembly, Provincial Minister, 
Advisor to the Chief Minister, Special Assistant to the Chief 
Minister, Provincial Parliamentary Secretary, Member of the 
Provincial Assembly, Advocate General including Additional 
Advocate General and Assistant Advocate General, Political 
Secretary, 5** Consultant to the Chief Minister and who holds or 
has held a post or office with the rank or status of a Provincial 
Minister; 
(iv)   is holding, or has held, an office or post in the service of Pakistan, 
or any service in connection with the affairs of the Federation, or  
of a Province, or of a local council constituted under any Federal 
or 
 
 
                         
 subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2002 (133 of 2002), 5 for ―prohibition‖. 
2The word and oblique ―and/‖ omitted ibid., 
3Omitted by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance , 2000 (4 of 2000), s.2. 
4Subs. by Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s.5  for ―National Accountability Bureau‖. 
5The words ―Advisor or‖ omitted ibid., 
VII of 
1970 
 

Page - 858             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
Provincial law relating to the constitution of local councils [co-
operative societies] or in the management of corporations, banks, 
financial institutions, 2** firms, concerns, undertakings or any 
other institution or organization established, controlled or 
administered by or under the Federal Government or a Provincial 
Government, other than a person who is a member of any of the 
armed forces of Pakistan, 3***except a person who is, or has been 
a member of the said forces and is holding, or has held, a post or 
office in any public corporation, bank, financial institution, 
undertaking or other organization established, controlled or 
administered by or under the Federal Government or a Provincial 
Government 4[or notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Pakistan Army Act, 1952 (XXXIX of 1952), or any other law for 
the time being in force, a person who is a civilian employee of the 
Armed Forces of Pakistan;] 
(v) 
5** has been, the Chairman or Vice Chairman of a zila council, a 
municipal committee, a municipal corporation or a metropolitan 
corporation constituted under any Federal or Provincial law 
relating to local councils; and 
          ―Explanation‖ For the purpose of this sub-clause the 
expressions ―Chairman‖ and ―Vice Chairman‖ shall include 
―Mayor‖ and ―Deputy Mayor‖ as the case may be, and the 
respective councilors therein. 
 
6[(va) 
is or has been a District Nazim or Naib Nazim, Tehsil Nazim 
or Naib Nazim or Union Nazim or Naib Nazim;] 
 
(vi) 
7***has served in and retired or resigned from or has been 
discharged or dismissed from the Armed Forces of Pakistan; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                         
 Ins. by the National Accountability Bureau (Admt.) Ordinance, 2002 (133 of 2002),s.5. 
2The words ―co-operative societies‖ omitted ibid., which was previously amended by Ord. No. 35 of 2001, s,3. 
3Omittted by the National Accountability Bureau (Admt.) Ordinance, 2001(35 of 2001),s,3. 
4Ins. by Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s, 5. 
5The words ―is, or ―omitted ibid., 
6New sub-clause (va) ins, ibid., 
7Omitted by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2000 (4 of 2000), s.2. 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 859 
 
 
(n) 
―Offence‖ means the offences of corruption and corrupt practices  
[and other offences] as defined in this Ordinance and includes 2[the 
offences] specified in the Schedule to this Ordinance. 
(o) 
―PERSON‖ 3[,unless the context otherwise so requires], includes in 
the case of a 4[company or a body corporate], the sponsors, 
Chairman, Chief Executive, Managing Director, elected Directors, 
by whatever name called, and guarantors of the company 1[or body 
corporate] or any one exercising direction or control of the affairs of 
such 4[company or a body corporate]3***;and in the case of any 
firm, partnership or sole proprietorship, the partners, proprietor or 
any person having 1[any] interest in the said firm, partnership or 
proprietorship concern or direction or control thereof; 
(p) 
―Property‖ includes any or all movable and immovable properties 
situated within or outside Pakistan;  5* 
(q) 
―Government 
Property‖ means 6[property] belonging 
to 
the 
Government and includes gifts, donations, financial assistance, 
grants, aid received or collected in whatever name or for whatever 
purpose 7[by a holder of public office during the tenure of office; 
and] 
8(r) 
―Willful default‖ a person 9[or a holder of public office] is said to 
commit an offence of willful default under this Ordinance if he does 
not pay 3[, or continues not to pay,] or return or repay the 
amount 9[due from him] to any bank, financial institution, 
cooperative society,10** Government department , statutory body or 
an authority established or controlled by a Government on the date 
that it became due 9[as per agreement containing the obligation to 
pay, return or repay or] 
 
                         
 Ins. by the National Accountability Bureau (Admt.) Ordinance, 2002 (133 of 2002), s. 5. 
2Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2001 (35 of 2001), s.3 for ―those offences 
as‖. 
3Ins. and omitted by the National Accountability Bureau (second Amdt.)Ordinance, 2000 (24 of 2000). s.2. 
4Subs. by Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s.5, for ―Corporate body‖. 
5The word ―and‖ omitted ibid., 
6Subs. ibid.,s.k, for ‗both movable and immovable properties. 
7Subs. ibid., for ―during the tenure of office‖. 
8New clause (r) added by the National Accountability Bureau (amdt.) Ordinance 2000 (4 of 2000), s.2. 
9Ins. by Ord. No. 133 of 2002,s.5. 
10The words ―or a‖ omitted ibid., s.5. 

Page - 860             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
according to the laws, rules, regulations, instructions, issued or 
notified by [the State Bank of Pakistan, or the bank,] financial 
institution, 
cooperative 
society, 
Government 
Department2[,] 
statutory body or an authority established or controlled by a 
Government, as the case may be, and a 3[thirty days notice has been 
given to 4[such person or holder of public office.]]: 
Provided that it is not willful default under this Ordinance 
if 5[such person or holder of public office] was unable to pay, return 
or repay the amount as aforesaid on account of any willful breach of 
agreement or obligation or failure to perform statutory duty on the 
part of any bank, financial institution, cooperative society 2[,] or a 
Government 
department 2[,]statutory 
body 
or 
an 
authority 
established or controlled by Government 6[:] 
6[Provided further that in the case of default concerning a bank 
or a financial institution a seven days notice has also been given 
to 4[such person or holder of public office] by the Governor, State 
Bank of Pakistan: 
 Provided further that 7[the] aforesaid thirty days or seven days 
notice shall not apply to cases pending trial at the time of promulgation 
on of the National Accountability Bureau (Amendment) Ordinance, 
2001]. 
9[5A.   (1) A Judge of a Court who is a serving District and 
Sessions Judge shall hold office for a period of three years from the 
date of his initial appointment as such Judge. 
(2) 
An incumbent Judge who on the 24th April, 2001, is not 
a serving District and Sessions Judge and has exercised option to 
serve as a Judge shall continue for a period of three years from the 
date of his initial appointment as such Judge. 
 
 
                         
 Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Second Amdt.) Ordinance, 2000 (24 of 2000), s.2. 
2Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2002 (113 of 2002), s.5, for ―or a‖. 
3Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2001 (35 of 2001), s. .3, for ―certain words‖. 
4Subs by Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s.5, for ‗the defaulter‖. 
5Subs. ibid., for ―the accused‖. 
6Subs. and added by Ord. No. 35 of 2001, s.3. 
7Ins. by Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s.3. 
8The word ―etc‖ omitted ibid., s.6. 
9New sections 5A and 5B ins. by Ord. No. 35 of 2001. s.4 
Tenure 8*  
of a Judge 
 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 861 
 
 
(3) 
An incumbent Judge who is a serving District and 
Sessions Judge and retires while serving as such Judge shall, subject 
to his option, continue for a period of three years from the date of his 
initial appointment as such Judge. 
(4) 
A Judge shall not be removed or transferred from his 
office before the completion of the term  [with] his office without 
consultation of the Chief Justice of the High Court concerned. 
5B.  Where a serving District and Sessions Judge retires 
while serving as a Judge of a Court, he shall be entitled to such 
pension as would have been admissible to him in his service as 
District and Sessions Judge, had he not been appointed as Judge of a 
Court, his service as a Judge of a Court being treated as service for 
the purpose of calculating that pension. 
6. (a)  
There shall be constituted a National Accountability 
Bureau for the whole of Pakistan. 
   2[(b)  Chairman, National Accountability Bureau: 
(i)     There shall be a Chairman NAB to be appointed by 
the President in consultation with the 3[Leader of 
the House and the Leader of the Opposition in the 
National Assembly] for a 4[non-extendable] period 
of 5[four] years on such terms and conditions as 
may be determined by the President and shall not 
be removed except on the grounds of removal of 
Judge of Supreme Court of Pakistan 6[:] 
7[Provided that the present incumbent of the 
office of Chairman, NAB, shall complete the 
period of four years from the date of his initial 
appointment.]. 
(ii) 
The Chairman NAB may, in writing under his 
hand, addressed to the President, resign his office. 
 8[(ba) 
A person shall not be appointed as Chairman NAB 
unless he— 
                         
 Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Admt.) Ordinance, 2002 (133 of 2002), s.6, for ―of‖. 
2Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Admt.) Ordinance 2001 (35 of 2001), s.5. for sub-   section (b), 
which was previously amended by various enactments. 
3Subs. by Ords. No. 133 of 2002, s. 7. for ―Chief Justice of Pakistan‖. 
4 Ins. ibid., 
5Subs. ibid., for ―three‖. 
6Subs. ibid., for full stop. 
7New proviso added ibid., 
8New sub-section (ba) added ibid., 
Pensionery benefits to 
serving District and 
Sessions Judge retiring 
while serving as Judge 
of a Court 
National Accountability 
Bureau 
 

Page - 862             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
(i) is a retired Chief Justice or a Judge of the 
Supreme Court  or a Chief Justice of a High 
Court, or 
(ii) is a retired officer of the Armed Forces of 
Pakistan equivalent to the rank of a Lieutenant 
General; or 
(iii)    is a retired Federal Government Officer in  
BPS-22 or equivalent]. 
(c) 
Acting 
Chairman, 
National 
Accountability 
Bureau: As and when the Chairman NAB is absent or unable to 
perform the functions of his office due to any reason whatsoever, the 
Deputy Chairman [NAB,] will act as the Chairman NAB, and in 
case the Deputy Chairman 1[NAB,] is absent or unable to perform 
the functions of the office, 2[any officer of the NAB] duly authorized 
by the Chairman NAB, to act as Chairman NAB, 3[shall] act as the 
Chairman NAB. 
7.   (a) There shall be a Deputy Chairman NAB appointed by 
the 4[President] in consultation with the Chairman NAB. The Deputy 
Chairman  1[NAB] shall assist the Chairman 1[NAB] in the performance 
of his duties and 1[shall] carry out such functions as may be directed 
by the Chairman1[NAB].  
5[(aa)   A person shall not be appointed as Deputy Chairman 
NAB unless he— 
(i) 
is or has been an officer of the Armed Forces of 
Pakistan equivalent to the rank of a Major General; or 
(ii)  is or has been a Federal Government officer in  
BPS-21 or equivalent;] 
6[(b)      The Deputy Chairman 1[NAB] shall hold office for 
a 1[non-extendable] period of three years and shall not be removed 
except on the ground of misconduct as defined in sub-rule (4) of rule 2 of 
the Government Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules, 1973.] 
                         
Ins. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2002 (133 of 2002), ss. 7, 8 and 9. 
2Subs. ibid., s.7, for “any other person”. 
3Subs. ibid., for “ to”. 
4Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Admt.) Ordinance,  2000 (4 of 2000), s. 4 for “Chief 
Executive”. 
5New sub-section (aa) ins. by Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s.8. 
6Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2001 (35 of 2001), for sub-
section (b). 
Now Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules, 2020. 
Deputy 
Chairman 
National 
Accountability 
Bureau 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 863 
 
 
Prosecutor  
General 
Accountability 
8.  [(a) (i) The President of Pakistan, in consultation with 
the 2***Chairman NAB, may appoint any person, who is qualified to  be 
appointed as a Judge of the Supreme Court, as Prosecutor General 
Accountability. 
 
(ii)     The 
Prosecutor 
General 
Accountability 
shall 
hold 
independent office on whole time basis and shall not hold 
any other office concurrently. 
(iii)    The Prosecutor General Accountability shall hold office for 
a 3[non-extendable] period of three years. 
(iv)  The Prosecutor General Accountability shall not be 
removed from office except on the grounds of removal of a 
Judge of Supreme Court of Pakistan. 
(v)    The Prosecutor General Accountability may, by writing 
under his hand addressed to the President of Pakistan, 
resign his office.] 
 
(b) 
The Prosecutor General 3[Accountability] shall give advice 
to the Chairman NAB upon such legal matters and perform such other 
duties of a legal character as may be referred or assigned to him by the 
Chairman NAB and in the performance of his duties, he shall have the right of 
audience in all 4[Courts established under this Ordinance and all other 
Courts 3[including the Supreme Court and a High Court] and Tribunals]. 
 
5[(c)    The Prosecutor General Accountability, with the approval 
of Chairman NAB 6***, may appoint Special Prosecutors to conduct 
prosecution of cases and to appoint advocates to institute or defend cases, 
appeals, petitions, applications and all other matters before any court 7[or 
tribunal including the High Courts and Supreme Court in matters arising 
out of or relating to proceedings under this Ordinance.] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                         
 Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2001 (35 of 2001), s.7, for ―sub-section (a)‘. 
2The words ―Chief Justice of Pakistan and‖ omitted by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 
2002 (133 of 2002) s. 9. 
3Ins. ibid., ss. 8 and 9. 
4Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2000 (4 of 2000), s.5, for certain words. 
5Subs. by Ord. No. 35 of 2001, s.7, sub-section (c). 
6The certain words omitted by Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s.9. 
7Ins. ibid., 

Page - 864             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
 (d)   In case the Prosecutor General Accountability is absent 
or unable to perform the functions of his office due to any reason 
whatsoever, any other Law Officer of the NAB, duly authorised by 
the Chairman NAB, shall act as the Prosecutor General Accountability.]   
9.  (a)  A holder of a public office, or any other person, is said 
to commit or to have committed the offence of corruption and 
corrupt practices—  
(i) 
if he accepts or obtains from any person or offers any 
gratification 
directly 
or 
indirectly, 
other 
than 
legal 
remuneration, as a motive or reward such as is specified in 
section 161 of the Pakistan Penal Code (Act XLV of 1860) for 
doing or for-bearing to do any official act, or for showing or 
for-bearing to show, in the exercise of his official functions, 
favour or disfavour to any person, or for rendering or 
attempting to render any service or disservice to any person; or 
(ii)  if he accepts or obtains or offers any valuable thing without 
consideration, or for a consideration which he knows to be 
inadequate, from any person whom he knows to have been, or 
likely to be, concerned in any proceeding or business transacted or 
about to be transacted by him, or having any connection with his 
official functions or 2[from] any person whom he knows to be 
interested in or related to the person so concerned; or 
(iii)  if he dishonestly or fraudulently misappropriates or otherwise 
converts for his own use, or for the use of any other person, 
any property entrusted to him, or under his control, or willfully 
allows any other person so to do; or 
(iv) if he by corrupt, dishonest, or illegal means, obtains or seeks to 
obtain for himself, or for his spouse 3* or dependents or any 
other person, any property, valuable thing, or pecuniary 
advantage; or 
(v)  if he or any of his dependents or benamidar owns, possesses, 
or has 4[acquired] right or title in any 5[―assets or holds 
irrevocable power of attorney in respect of any assets] or 
 
                         
 New Sub-section (d) ins. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2002 (133 of 2002), s.9. 
2Subs. ibid., s.10, for ―from‖. 
3The word and oblique ‗and/‖ omitted ibid., 
4Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Second Amdt.) Ordinance, 2000 (24 of 2000), s.4. 
5Subs. by Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s. 10 for ―movable or immovable property‖. 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 865 
 
 
pecuniary resources disproportionate to his known sources of 
income, which he cannot [reasonably] account for 2[or maintains a 
standard of living beyond that which is commensurate with his 
sources of income]; or 
 
(vi) 2[if he misuses his authority so as to gain any benefit or favour 
for himself or any other person, or 3[renders or attempts to 
render] 4[or willfully fails to exercise his authority to prevent 
the grant, or rendition of any undue benefit or favour which he 
could have prevented by exercising his authority]; 
 
(vii) if he has issued any directive, policy, or any SRO (Statutory 
Regulatory Order) or any other order which grants or 5[attempts 
to grant] any 6[undue] concession or benefit in any taxation matter 
or law or otherwise so as to benefit himself or any relative or 
associate or a benamidar 1[or any other person] 7 
 
8[(viii) if he commits an offence of willful default, 9{; or }] 
 
10[(ix) if he commits the offence of cheating as defined in section 415 
of the Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 (Act XLV of 1860), and 
thereby dishonestly induces members of the public at large to 
deliver any property including money or valuable security to 
any person; or 
 
(x) if he commits the offence of criminal breach of trust as defined 
in section 405 of the Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 (Act XLV of 
1860) with regard to any property including money or valuable 
security entrusted to him by members of the public at large; 
 
 
                         
 Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2002 (133 of 2002), s. 10, for ―reasonable‖. 
2Ins. ibid., 
3Subs. ibid., for ―to render or attempt to do so‖. 
4Added by the National Accountability Bureau (Second Amdt.) Ordinance, 2000 (24 of  2000), s. 4. 
5Subs. by Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s. 10, for ―enables‖. 
6Ins. by ord. No. 24 of 2000, s.4. 
7Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2001 (35 of 2000), s. 6. for full stop. 
8Added, ibid., 
9Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2001 (35 of 2001), s. 8, for full stop. 
10Subs by Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s. 10, for ―clause (ix)‖. 

Page - 866             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
 
(xi) if he, in his capacity as a banker, merchant, factor, broker, 
attorney or agent, commits criminal breach of trust as provided 
in section 409 of the Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 (Act XLV of 
1860) in respect of property entrusted to him or over which he 
has dominion; and 
 
(xii) if he aids, assists, abets, attempts or acts in conspiracy with a 
person or a holder of public office accused of an offence as 
provided in clauses (i) to (xi).]; and 
(b)     All offences under this Ordinance shall be non-boilable 
and, notwithstanding anything contained in section [426, 491,] 497, 
498 and 561 A or any other provision of the Code, or any other law 
for the time being in force no Court 2*** shall have jurisdiction to 
grant bail to any person accused of any offence under this 
Ordinance. 
3[(c)     If after completing the investigation of an offence 
against a holder of public office or any other person, the Chairman 
NAB is satisfied that no prima facie case is made out against him 
and the case may be closed, the Chairman NAB shall refer the matter 
to a Court for approval and for the release of the accused, if in custody.] 
4*         *          *          *          *          *          * 
10. (a) 5[A holder of public office, or any other person who 
commits the offence of corruption and corrupt practices shall be 
punishable with 6[rigorous] imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to 14 years 7[and with fine] and such of the assets 
and 8[pecuniary resources] of such9[holder of public office or 
person, as are] found to be disproportionate to the known sources of 
his income or which 10[are] acquired by money obtained through 
corruption and corrupt  practices whether in his name or in the name 
                         
 Ins. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2000 (4 of 2000), s. 6. 
2Added ibid., 
3Subs. ibid., for ―sub-section (b)‖. 
4Subs. ibid., s. 12, for ―a person‖. 
5The certain words omitted ibid., s. 12. 
6Subs. ibid., for certain words. 
7Omitted by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2000 (4 of 2000), s. 7. 
8Subs. by Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s. 13, for ―a person‖. 
9The words and  comma ―movable or immovable‖ omitted ibid., 
10Subs. ibid., for ―person which is,‖. 
Punishment for 
corruption and 
corrupt practices 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 867 
 
 
of any of his dependents, or benamidars shall be *** forfeited to the 
appropriate Government 2[, or the concerned bank or financial 
institution as the case may be.] 
3[(b) 
The offences specified in the Schedule to this 
Ordinance shall be punishable in the manner specified therein. 
 
(c)   The Federal Government may, by notification in the 
official Gazette, amend the Schedule so as to add any entry thereto 
or modify or omit any entry therein. 
11.    Where 4[an accused] found guilty of an offence is 
sentenced to pay a fine, 5* * * the amount of the fine shall in no case 
be less than the gain derived by the accused or any relative or 
associate 6[by the commission of the offence.].  
12.  (a) The Chairman NAB or the Court trying 8[an 
accused] for any offence as specified under this Ordinance, may, at 
any time, if there 8*** appear reasonable grounds for believing that 
the accused has committed such an offence, order the freezing of his 
property, 9*** or part thereof, whether in his possession or in the 
possession of any relative, associate or person on his behalf. 
(b) 
 If the property ordered to be frozen under sub-section (a) is 
a debt or other movable property, the freezing may be made: 
(i) 
 by seizure; or 
(ii)    by appointment of receiver; or 
(iii)   by prohibiting the delivery of such property to the 
accused or to anyone on his  behalf; or 
(iv)    by all or any of such or other methods as the Court or the 
Chairman NAB as the case may be, deem fit. 
(c) 
If the property ordered to be frozen is immovable, the 
freezing shall, in the case of land paying revenue, be made through the 
Collector of the district in which the land is situated, and in all other 
cases— 
                         
The words ―liable to be‖ omitted by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2002 (133 of 2002), s. 11. 
2Added ibid., 
3Subs. ibid., for ‗sub-section (b).‖ 
4Subs. ibid., s. 12, for ―a person‖. 
5The certain words omitted ibid., s. 12. 
6Subs. ibid., for certain words. 
7Omitted by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2000(4 of 2000), s. 7. 
8Subs. by Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s. 13, for ―a person‖. 
9The words and comma ―movable or immovable‖, omitted ibid., 
Imposition  
of fine 
 
Power 7*** to 
freeze  
property: 

Page - 868             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
(i) 
by taking possession; or 
(ii) 
by appointment of receiver; or 
(iii) by prohibiting the payment of rent or delivery of property 
 to the accused or to any other person on his behalf; or 
(iv) by all or any of such methods as the Chairman NAB or 
the Court may deem fit: 
Provided that any order of seizure, freezing, 
attachment or any prohibitory order mentioned above by 
the Chairman NAB, shall remain in force for a period 
not exceeding  [fifteen] days unless confirmed by the 2* 
Court, where the Reference under this Ordinance shall 
be sent by 3[the Chairman] NAB: 
Provided further that notwithstanding 4[anything to 
the 
contrary 
contained 
herein,]  that 
the 
order 
of 3[Chairman] NAB or the Court shall be effective from 
the time of passing thereof or proclamation thereof in a 
newspaper, widely circulated and dispatch at the last 
known address of the accused 5[either by registered post 
A.D. or courier service or 6* * * electronic media as 
the 7[Court] may deem proper having regard to the facts 
and circumstances of the case.]  
(d)     If the property ordered to be frozen consists of livestock 
or is of a perishable nature, the Chairman NAB, or the Court may, if it 
deems proper and expedient, order the immediate sale thereof and the 
proceeds of the sale may be deposited with the Chairman NAB or the 
Court, or as either may direct as appropriate. 
(e)     The powers, duties, and liabilities of a receiver, if any, 
appointed under this section shall be the same as those of a receiver 
appointed under Order-XL of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 
(Act V of 1908). 
 
                         
 Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2001 (35 of 2001), s.9, for ―30‖. 
2The word ―Accountability‖ omitted by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2002 (133 of 
2002), s. 13. 
3Ins. ibid., 
4Subs. ibid., for ―that‖. 
5Added by the National Accountability Bureau  (Second Amdt.) Ordinance, 2000 (24 of 2000), s.5. 
6The words ―any other mode of‖ omitted by Ord. No. 133 of 2002. 
7Subs. ibid., for ―court‖. 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 869 
 
 
[(f)      The order of freezing mentioned in sub-sections ‗a‘ to 
‗e‘ shall remain operative until the final disposal of the case by the 
Court, and in the event of the acquittal of the accused, shall continue 
to remain operative for a period of ten days after receipt of certified copy 
of the order of acquittal 2[or release] by NAB, whereafter it shall be 
subject to an order by the court in which an appeal, if any, is filed. 
13.   (a)   Notwithstanding the provisions of any law for the 
time  being in force, the 3* Court shall have exclusive jurisdiction to 
entertain and  adjudicate upon all claims or objections against the 
freezing of any property under section 12 above. Such claims or 
objections shall be made before the 3* Court within 14 days from the 
date of the order freezing such property. 
(b)   The Court may for sufficient cause extend the time for 
filing such claims or objections for a period not exceeding additional 
14 days. 
4[(c)  The accused or any other aggrieved party, whose claim 
or objection against freezing of property has been dismissed by the 
Court, may, within ten days file an appeal against such order before 
the High Court]. 
14.  (a) Where in any trial of 5[an offence under clauses (i), (ii), 
(iii) and (iv) of sub-section (a) of section 9] it is proved that an accused 
person has  accepted or obtained, or has agreed to accept or attempted to 
obtain, for himself or for any other person any gratification, other than 
legal remuneration, or any valuable thing, or any pecuniary advantage 
from a person or any agent of a person, for any favour shown or 
promised to be shown by the accused, it shall be presumed, unless the 
contrary is proved, that he accepted or obtained, or agreed to  accept or 
attempted to obtain, that gratification or that valuable thing or pecuniary 
advantage for, himself or some other person, as the case may be, as a 
motive or a reward such as is specified in section 161 to 163 of the 
Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 (Act XLV of 1860), or, as the case may be, 
without consideration, or for a consideration which he, believed to be 
inadequate. 
(b)     Where in any trial of an offence punishable under-section 
165A of the Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 (Act XLV of 1860) it is proved 
that any gratification, other than legal remuneration or any valuable thing 
                         
 Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2001 (35 of 2001), s. 9. for sub-section (f). 
2Ins. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2002 (133 of 2002), s. 13. 
3The word ―Accountability‖ omitted ibid., s. 14. 
4Subs. by Ord. No. 35 of 2001, s. 10, for sub-section (c), which was previously amended by Ord. No. 4 of 
2000, s.8 
5Subs. by Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s. 15, for certain words. 
Claim or  
objection  
against  
freezing. 
 
Presumption 
against 
accused 
accepting 
illegal 
gratification. 
 

Page - 870             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
has been given, or offered to be given, or attempted to be given, by 
any accused person, it shall be presumed, unless the contrary is 
proved, that he gave or offered to give, or attempted, to give, that 
gratification, or that valuable thing, as the case may be, as a motive or a 
reward such as is specified in section 161 to 163 of the said Code; or, as 
the case may, be without consideration or for a consideration which he 
believed to be inadequate. 
(c) 
In any trial of an offence punishable under [―clause (v) 
of sub-section (a) of section 9 of‖] this Ordinance, the fact that the 
accused person or any other person on his behalf, is in possession, 
for which the accused person cannot satisfactorily account, 
of 2[assets] or pecuniary resources disproportionate to his known 
source of income, or that such person has, at or about the time of the 
commission of the, offence with which he is charged, obtained an 
accretion to his pecuniary resources or property for which he cannot 
satisfactorily account the Court shall presume, unless the contrary is 
proved, that the accused person is guilty of the offence of corruption 
and 3* corrupt practices and his conviction 4[therefore] shall not be 
invalid by reason only that it is based solely on such a presumption. 
5[ (d)    6[In any trial] of an offence under 7[clauses (vi) and 
(vii) of section 9], the burden of proof that he used his authority, or 
issued any directive, or authorised the issuance of any policy or 
statutory rule or order (SRO), or made any grant or allowed any 
concession, in the public interest, fairly, justly, and for the 
advancement of the purpose of the enactment under which the 
authority was used, directive or policy or rule or order was issued or 
grant was made or concession was allowed shall lie on 8[the 
accused], and in the absence of such proof the accused shall be 
guilty of the offence, and his conviction shall not be invalid by the 
reason that it is based solely on such presumption:] 
9[Provided that the prosecution shall first make out a 
reasonable case against the accused charged under clause (vi) or 
clause (vii) of sub-section (a) of section 9.] 
                         
 Ins. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2002 (133 of 2002), s. 15. 
2Subs. ibid, for ―Property‖. 
3The oblique and word ―or‖ omitted ibid: 
4Subs. ibid., for ‗therefore‖. 
5New sub-section (d) added by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2000 (4 of 2000), s.9. 
6Subs. by Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s.14, for ―where a person is accused‖. 
7Subs. ibid., for certain words. 
8Subs ibid., for ―him‖ 
9Subs. and added by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2001 (35 of 2001), s. 11. 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 871 
 
 
15. 2[(a) Where an accused person is convicted of 3[an offence 
under section 9 of this Ordinance] he shall forthwith cease to hold public 
office, if any, held by him and further he shall stand disqualified for a 
period of ten years, to be reckoned from the date he is released after 
serving the sentence, for seeking or from being elected, chosen, 
appointed or nominated as a member or representative of any public 
body or any statutory or local authority or in service of Pakistan or of any 
Province: 
Provided that any accused person who has availed the benefit 
of 4[sub-section (b) of section] 25 shall also be deemed to have been 
convicted for an offence under this Ordinance, and shall forthwith cease 
to hold public office, if any, held by him and further he shall stand 
disqualified for a period of ten years, to be reckoned from the date he has 
discharged his liabilities relating to the matter or transaction in issue, for 
seeking or from being elected, chosen, appointed or nominated as a 
member or representative of any public body or any statutory or local 
authority or in service of Pakistan or of any Province.] 
(b)    Any person convicted of an offence 5[under section 9 of this 
Ordinance] shall not be allowed to apply for or be granted or allowed any 
financial facilities in the form of any loan or advances 6[or other financial 
accommodation by] any bank or financial institution 7[owned or 
controlled by the Government] for a period of 10 years from the date of 
conviction. 
16.  8[(a) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for 
the time being in force an accused shall be prosecuted for an offence 
under this Ordinance in the Court and the case shall be heard from day to 
day and shall be disposed of within thirty days.] 
9[(b)  The Court shall sit at such place or places as the 10[Federal] 
Government may, by order, specify in this behalf.] 
11[(c)  Where more Courts than one have been established at a 
place, the Chief Justice of the High court of the Province concerned 
shall designate a Judge of any such Court to be an Administrative 
Judge and a case triable under this Ordinance shall be filed before 
the 12[Court] of the Administrative Judge who may either try the case 
                         
 Added by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2000 (4 of 2000), s. 10. 
2Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2001 Ord. No. (35 of 2001), s. 12, for sub-section (a). 
3Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2002 (133 of 2002), s. 16 for certain words. 
4Subs. ibid., s. 16, for ―section‖. 
5Subs. ibid for certain words. 
6Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Second Amdt.)Ordinance, 2000 (24of 2000),s.6,for ―from‖. 
7Subs. ibid., for ―in the public sector‖. 
8Subs. ibid., s.17 for ―sub-section (a)‖ which was previously amended by Ord. No. 4 of  2000, s.11 
9Subs. by Ord. No. 4 of 2000 s. 11 for the original sub-section (b). 
10Ins. by Ord. No. 4 of 2002, s. 17. 
11Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2001 (35 of 2001), s.13, for sub-section (c). 
12 Sub. By ord. No. 133 of 2002, s. 17, for ―Court‖. 
Disqualification to 
contest elections1 
[or to hold public 
office.] 
 
Trial of Offences 

Page - 872             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
himself or, assign it for trial by any other court established at that 
place at any time prior to the framing of the charge.] 
[(cc) In respect of a case assigned to a Court under sub section 
(c), all orders made or proceedings taken before the assignment shall be 
deemed to have been made or taken by the court to which the case has 
been assigned] 
(d)      Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, if in 
respect of any case relating to an offence triable under this Ordinance, the 
Chairman NAB, having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case 
may file a reference before any  2*  Court established anywhere in 
Pakistan, and such Court shall have the jurisdiction to try the same:] 
3[16A.  (a) 1Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law 
for the time being in force, the Chairman NAB may apply to any court of 
law or tribunal that any case involving 4[any] offence under this 
Ordinance pending before such court or tribunal shall be transferred to a 
Court established under this Ordinance, then such other Court or 
Tribunal shall transfer the said case to any Court established under this 
Ordinance and it shall 5[be deemed to be a reference under section 18 of 
the Ordinance, and it shall] not be necessary for the Court to recall any 
witness or again to record any evidence that may have been recorded.  
6[(b)  2In respect of any case pending before a Court, 
 5[if] Prosecutor General Accountability or any Special Prosecutor 
authorised by him in this behalf, having regard to the facts and 
circumstances of the case and in the interest of justice and for the 
protection and safety of witnesses, considers it necessary that such case is 
transferred for trial, he may apply, for the transfer of the case from any 
such Court in one Province to a Court in another Province or from 
one7[Court] in a Province to another Court in the same Province; 
(i) 
to the Supreme Court of Pakistan in case the transfer is intended 
from a Court in a Province to a Court in another Province; and 
(ii)     to the High Court of the Province in case the transfer is intended 
from one Court in a Province to another Court in the same 
Province; 
and the Supreme Court or the High Court, as the case may be, if it 
                         
 New sub-section (cc0. ins. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2001 (35 of 2001) s. 13. 
2The word ―Accountability‖. Omitted by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2002 (133 of 
2002) s.17. 
3New section 16A added by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2000 (4 of 2000), s. 12. 
4Subs. by Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s. 18. for ‗a Schedule‖. 
5Ins. ibid. 
6Subs. by Ord. No. 35 of 2001, s. 14 for sub-section (b). 
7Subs. by Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s. 18. for ―court‖ 
Transfer of 
Cases 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 873 
 
 
is in the interest of justice, transfer the case from one [court] to 
another 1[court] and the case so transferred shall be tried under this 
Ordinance without recalling any witness whose evidence may have 
been recorded. 
(c)        The accused may also make an application to the 
Supreme Court for the transfer of a case from a Court in one 
Province to a Court in another Province and to the High Court for 
transfer of a case from one Court in a Province to another Court in 
the same Province and the Supreme Court or the High Court, as the 
case may be, if it is in the interest of justice, transfer the case from 
one Court to another Court, and the case so transferred shall be tried 
under this Ordinance without recalling any witness whose evidence 
may have been recorded.]  
2[16-B. The Court shall have the power to punish for 
contempt of court with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
six months and with fine which may extend to one million rupees 
any person who— 
(a)      abuses, interferes with or obstructs the process of the Court in 
any way or disobeys any order or direction of the Court; 
(b)     scandalizes the Court or otherwise does anything which tends 
to bring the Court or a person constituting the Court into 
hatred, ridicule or contempt; 
(c)      does anything which tends to prejudice the determination of a 
matter pending or most likely to come up before the Court; or 
(d)   does anything, which, by any other law, constitutes contempt 
of court. 
3*         *          *          *          *          *          *        
17. (a) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law 
for the time being in force, unless there is anything inconsistent with 
the provisions to this Ordinance, the provisions of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1989), shall mutatis mutandis, 
apply to the proceedings under this 5[Ordinance.] 
(b)  Subject to sub section (a), the provisions of Chapter 
XXIIA of the Code shall apply to trials under this Ordinance. 
                         
 Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau  (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2002 (133 of 2002) s. 18 for ―court‖. 
2New section 16B ins. by the National Accountability Bureau (Second Amdt.) Ordinance 2000 (24 of 2000), 
s.7. 
3Explancation omitted by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2001 (35 of 2001), s.15. 
4Subs. by Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s. 19. for ‗Provision‖. 
5Subs. ibid: for ―Order‖. 
Contempt  
of Court. 
4 [Provision of 
the code to 
apply; 

Page - 874             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
(c)   Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (a) or 
sub-section (b) or in any law for the time being in force, the * Court 
may, for reasons to be recorded, dispense with any provision of the 
Code and follow such procedure as it may deem fit in the 
circumstances of the case. 
2[(d) Notwithstanding anything in section 234 of the Code, a 
person accused of more offences than one of the same kind 
committed during the space of any number of years, from the first to 
the last of such offences, may be charged with and tried at one trial 
for any number of such offences.]  
18.    (a) The 1* Court shall not take cognizance of any offence 
under this Ordinance except on a reference made by 3[the Chairman 
NAB or an officer of the NAB duly authorized by him.] 
(b) 
A reference under this Ordinance shall be initiated by 
the 4* National Accountability Bureau on— 
(i) 
a reference received from the 5*** appropriate government; or 
(ii) 
receipt of a complaint; or 
(ii) 
6[its] own accord. 
7[(c)] 
Where the Chairman NAB, or an officer of the NAB 
duly authorized by him, is of the opinion that it is, or may be, 
necessary and appropriate to initiate proceedings against any person, 
he shall refer the matter for inquiry or investigation.] 
(d) 
The responsibility for inquiry into and investigation of 
an offence alleged to have been committed under this Ordinance 
shall rest on the NAB to the exclusion of any other agency or authority, 
unless any such agency or authority is required to do so by the 
Chairman 8[NAB] 9[or by an officer of the NAB duly authorized by 
him]. 
                         
 The word ―Accountability‖ omitted by the National Accountability Bureau  (Amdt.) Ordinance 2002 (133 of 
2002), ss. 19 and 20. 
2New sub-section (d) ins. ibid. 
3Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Second Amdt.) Ordinance, 2000  (24 of 2000), s.8. for certain 
words. 
4Omitted ibid., 
5Omitted by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2000(4 of 2000), s. 13. 
6Subs. by Ord. No. 24 of 2000, s. 8 for ―his‖. 
7Subs. ibid., for the original sub-section (c). 
8Ins. by Ord. No. 133 of 2002. s. 20. 
9Subs. by Ord. No. 24 of 2000,s. 8 for ―or/and Deputy Chairman‖. 
Cognizance of 
offences 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 875 
 
 
(e) 
The Chairman NAB and such members, officers * or 
servants of the NAB shall have and exercise, for the purposes of an 
inquiry 1* or investigation the power to arrest any person, and all the 
powers of an officer-in-charge of a Police Station under the Code, 
and for that purpose may cause the attendance of any person, and 
when and if the assistance of any agency, police officer or any other 
official or agency, as the case may be, is sought by the NAB such 
official or agency shall render such assistance provided that no 
person shall be arrested without the permission of the 
Chairman 2[NAB] or any officer 2[of NAB] duly authorized by the 
Chairman NAB:  
(f) 
Any Inquiry 3[or] Investigation under this Ordinance 
shall be completed expeditiously4*** as may be practical and 
feasible. 
 
(g) 
The 5*Chairman NAB, 6[or 7* an officer of the NAB 
duly authorized by him, shall appraise the material and the evidence 
placed before him during the inquiry and the investigation, and if he 
decides that it would be proper and just to proceed further 8[and 
there is sufficient material to justify filing of a reference], he shall 
refer the matter to 9[a] Court. 
(h) 
If a complaint is inquired into and investigated by the 
NAB and it is concluded that the complaint received was prima facie 
frivolous or has been filed with intent to malign or defame any 
person, the Chairman 2[NAB] or Deputy Chairman NAB or 10[an 
officer of the NAB duly authorised by the Chairman NAB], may 
refer the matter to the court, and if the complainant is found guilty he 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to one year, or with fine or with both. 
 
                         
 The word ―and oblique and /‖ omitted by the  National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance 2002 (133 
of 2002) s. 20. 
2Ins. ibid., 
3Subs ibid., for ―and‖ 
4Omitted by the National Accountability Bureau  (Second Amdt.) Ordinance, 2000 (24 of 2000), s. 8. 
5Omitted by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2000(4 of 2000), s. 13. 
6Ins. by Ord. No. 24 of 2000, s.8. 
7Omitted by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, Ordinance, 2001 (35 of 2001), s.16. 
8Ins. s. 16. 
9Subs. by Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s. 20, for ―an Accountability‘. 
10Subs. ibid., for ―the prescribed law officer‖. 

Page - 876             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
19.:  The Chairman NAB or  [an officer of the NAB duly 
authorised by him] may, during the course of an inquiry 2[or 
investigation] 3[of an offence under this Ordinance]:- 
(a) 
call for information from any person for the purpose of 
satisfying himself whether there has been any contravention of 
the provisions of this Ordinance or any rule or order made 
thereunder. 
(b)     require any person to produce or deliver any document or 
thing useful or relevant to the inquiry 2[or investigation]; 
(c) 
examine any person acquainted with the facts and 
circumstances of the case; 4* 
5[(d) require any bank or financial institution, notwithstanding 
anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, 
to provide any information relating to any person whosoever, 
including copies of entries made in a bank‘s or a financial 
institution‘s books such as ledgers, day books, cash books and 
all other books including record of information and 
transactions saved in electronic or digital form, and the 
keepers of such books or records shall be obliged to certify the 
copies in accordance with law 6[; and] 
7[(e)  where there is reasonable suspicion that any person is involved 
in or is privy to an offence under this Ordinance, the Chairman 
NAB may, with the prior approval in writing of the High Court 
concerned, direct that surveillance of that person may be 
carried out through such means as may be necessary in the 
facts and circumstances of the case and the Chairman NAB, 
may in this regard seek the aid and assistance of 
any 8[Governmental] agency and the information so collected 
may be used as evidence in the trial under this Ordinance: 
Provided that the copies obtained or information 
received or evidence collected under clauses (d) and (e) shall 
be 9[kept] confidential and shall not be used for any purpose 
other than for legal proceedings under this Ordinance. 
                         
Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2002 (133 of 2002), s. 21, for ―any 
authorized officer‖. 
2Ins. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2000 (4 of 2000), s. 14. 
3Subs. by Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s.21, for certain words. 
4The words ―and‖ omitted ibid., 
5Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2001 (35 of 2001), s. 17. for clause (d). 
6Subs. by Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s. 21, for full stop. 
7New clause (e) added by Ord. No. 35 of 2001, s. 17. 
8Subs. by Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s. 21, for ―Government‖. 
9Ins. ibid., 
Power to call 
for information 
 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 877 
 
 
20.        (a) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the 
time being in force, it shall be the duty of all banks and financial 
institutions to take prompt and immediate notice of all unusual or large 
transactions  [in an account], which have no apparently genuine 
economic or lawful purpose and upon bonafide professional judgment of 
the Bank 2[or financial institution] that such transactions could constitute 
or be related to 3[an offence under this Ordinance], the manager or 
director of such 4[Bank or] financial institution shall report all such 
transactions to the Chairman NAB forthwith by the quickest possible 
mode of communication to be confirmed in writing. 
(b)  
Whosoever fails to supply the information in accordance 
with subsection (a) shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment, 
which may extend to 5 years, 5[and] with fine.  6*** 
7 *         *          *          *          *          *          *     
21. -: The Chairman NAB or any officer authorized by the Federal 
Government may request a Foreign State to do 8[any or all of] the 
following acts in accordance with the law of such State:--  
(a) 
have evidence taken, or documents or other articles produced; 
(b) 
obtain and execute search warrants or other lawful instruments 
authorizing search for things relevant to investigation or 
proceedings in Pakistan believed to be located in that State, and if 
found, seize them; 
(c) 
freeze assets, by whatever processes are lawfully available in that 
State, to the extent to which the assets are believed on reasonable 
grounds to be situated in that State; 
(d) 
confiscate articles and forfeit assets to the extent to which the 
articles or assets, as the case may be, are believed to be located in 
that State; 
(e) 
transfer to Pakistan any such evidence, documents, things articles, 
assets or proceeds realized from the disposal of such articles or 
assets 9* 
(f) 
transfer in custody to Pakistan a person detained in 10[that] state 
who consents to assist Pakistan in the relevant investigation or 
proceedings11; *12. 
                         
 1Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2001 (35 of 2001), s.18, for ―with context to the‖. 
2Subs. ibid. for ―Suspicion‖. 
3Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2002 (133 of 2002), s. 22, for certain words. 
4Ins. by Ord. No. 35 of 2001, s. 18. 
5Subs. by Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s. 22, for ―or‖ 
6The Comma and words ―or with both‖ omitted ibid., 
7Sub-section (c) omitted ibid., 
8Ins. ibid., s. 23. 
9Omitted by Ord. No. 35 of 2001, s. 19. 
10Subs. by Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s. 23, for the foreign‖. 
11Subs. by Ord. No. 35 of 2001, s. 19. 
12The word ―and‖ omitted by Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s. 23. 
Reporting of 
suspicious 
financial 
transaction. 
International 
cooperation 
request for 
mutual legal 
assistance. 

Page - 878             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
[(g)   notwithstanding anything contained in the Qanun-e-Shahadat 
 Order 1984 (P.O. 10 of 1984) or any other law for the time being 
in force all evidence, documents or any other material transferred 
to Pakistan by a Foreign Government shall be receivable as 
evidence in legal proceedings under this Ordinance 2[; and] 
3[(h)  notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained hereinabove, 
the Chairman NAB may, on such terms and conditions as he 
deems fit, employ any person or organization, whether in Pakistan 
or abroad, for detecting, tracing or identifying assets acquired by 
an accused in connection with an offence under this Ordinance, 
and secreted or hoarded abroad, or for recovery of and repatriation 
to Pakistan of such assets. 
 22. (a) The Chairman NAB may 4[inquire into and] investigate 
any suspected offence, which appears to him on reasonable grounds to 
involve 5[an offence under] this Ordinance, and has been referred to him, 
or of his own accord. 
(b)  
The Chairman NAB may, if he thinks fit, conduct any such 
investigation in conjunction with any other agency or any other person 6* 
who is, in the opinion of the Chairman NAB, a proper Agency or person 
to be concerned in it.  
23. (a)  Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for 
the time being in force after the Chairman NAB has initiated 7[an inquiry 
or] investigation into 8[any offence] under this Ordinance, alleged to have 
been committed by an accused person, 7[accused] person or any relative 
or associate of 7[accused] person or any other person on his behalf, shall 
not transfer by any means whatsoever, 7[or] create a charge on any 9*** 
property owned by him or in his possession, while the inquiry, 
investigation or proceedings are pending before the NAB or the 10* 
Court; and any transfer of any right; title or interest or creation of a 
charge on such property shall be void. 
(b) 
Any person who transfers, or creates a charge on 
property in contravention of sub-section (a) shall be punishable with 
rigorous imprisonment for a term, which may extend to three years 
                         
 New clause (g) added by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance 2001 (35 of 2001), s. 20. 
2Ins. by the National Accountability Bureau (Second Amdt.) Ordinance, 2000 (24 of 2000), s. 9. 
3Ins. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2002 (133 of 2002), s. 26. 
4Ins. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance 2000 94 of 2000), s. 15. 
5Subs. by Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s. 24, for certain words. 
6The word and oblique ―which/‖ omitted ibid., 
7Ins.ibid.,ss. 25 and 26. 
8Subs. ibid, for ― the offences‖. 
9The words ―movable or immovable‖ omitted ibid., 
10The word ―accountability‖ omitted ibid., 
Jurisdiction 
Transfer of 
property 
void 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 879 
 
 
and shall also be liable to fine not exceeding the value of the 
property involved  [:] 
 1[Provided that such transfer of any right, title or interest or 
creation of a charge on such property shall not be void if made with 
the approval of the Court, subject to such terms and conditions as the 
Court may deem fit.] 
24. (a) The Chairman NAB shall have the power, at any stage 
of the 3[inquiry or] investigation under this Ordinance, to direct that 
the accused, if not already arrested, shall be arrested. 
(b)    If the Chairman, NAB 2[, or an officer of the NAB duly 
authorized by him], decides to refer the case to a Court, such 
reference shall contain the substance of the 5[offence or offences as 
the case may be,] alleged to have been committed by the accused 
and a copy of such reference shall be forwarded to the Registrar of 
the 4*Court to which the case has been sent to try the accused, and 
another copy shall be delivered to the accused. 
 (c) The provision of sub-section (a) shall also apply to 
cases, which have already been referred to the Court. 
6[(d) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, where the 
holder of a public office or any other person accused of an offence is 
arrested by NAB under this Ordinance, NAB shall, as soon as may be, 
inform him of the grounds and substance on the basis of which he has 
been arrested and produce him before, the 7[Court] 8*** within a period 
of twenty-four hours of arrest excluding the time necessary for the 
journey from the place of arrest to the 7[Court] and such person shall, 
having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case, be liable to be 
detained in the custody of NAB for the purpose of inquiry and 
investigation for a period not exceeding ninety days 9[and the Court may 
remand an accused person to custody not exceeding fifteen days at a time 
and for every subsequent remand the Court shall record reasons in 
writing copy of which shall be sent to the High Court.] 
                         
 Subs. and added by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance 2001 (35 of 2001), s. 20. 
2Ins. by the National Accountability (Second Amdt.) Ordinance, 2000 (24 of 2000), s. 9. 
3Ins. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2002 (133 of 2002), s.26. 
4Omitted by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance,  2000 (4 of 2000), s.16. 
5Subs. by Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s. 26, for ―offence/offences‖. 
6Subs by Ord. No. 4 of 2000, s. 16, for the original sub section (d). 
7Subs. by Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s.26, for ‗court‘. 
8The words ―established under this ordinance‖ omitted ibid., 
9Subs by Ord. No. 35 of 2001, s.21. 
2[ARREST] 

Page - 880             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
 [(e)  All persons presently in custody shall immediately upon 
coming into force of this sub-section, unless previously produced 
before 2[a] Court be produced before such Court as provided in sub-
section (d) and the Order authorizing retention of custody by NAB 
shall be deemed to relate to the date of arrest; and] 
3[(f)  The Chairman NAB may declare and notify any 
place as 4[a police station or] a sub-jail at his discretion.] 
5[25.   (a)    Notwithstanding anything contained in section 15 
or in any other law for the time being in force, where a holder of 
public office or any other person, prior to the authorization of 
investigation against him, voluntarily comes forward and offers to 
return the assets or gains acquired or made by him in the course, or 
as the consequence, of any offence under this Ordinance, the 
Chairman NAB may accept such offer and after determination of the 
amount due from such person and its deposit with the NAB 
discharge such person from all his liability in respect of the matter or 
transaction in issue: 
Provided that the matter is not sub judice in any court of law. 
(b) 
Where at any time after the authorization of investigation, 
before or after the commencement of the trial or during the pendency 
of an appeal, the accused offers to return to the NAB the assets or 
gains acquired or made by him in the course, or as a consequence, of 
any offence under this Ordinance, the Chairman, NAB, may, in his 
discretion, after taking into consideration the facts and circumstances 
of the case, accept the offer on such terms and conditions as he may 
consider necessary, and if the accused agrees to return to the NAB 
the amount determined by the Chairman, NAB, the Chairman, NAB, 
shall refer the case for the approval of the Court, or as the case may 
be, the Appellate Court and for the release of the accused. 
(c) 
The amount deposited by the accused with the NAB 
shall be transferred to the Federal Government or, as the case may 
be, a Provincial Government or the concerned bank or financial 
institution, company, body corporate, co-operative society, statutory 
body, or authority concerned within one month from the date of such 
deposit] 
 
                         
 New sub-section (e) added by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance 2001 (35 of 2001) s.21. 
2Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2002 (133 of 2002), s. 26, for ―an Accountability‖. 
3Sub-section (e) renumbered as sub-section (f) by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance 2000 (4 of 
2000) s.16. 
4Ins. ibid. 
5Subs. by Ord. No. 133 of 2002,s. 27, for ―section 25‖, which was previously amended by various enactments. 
Voluntary return 
and plea bargain 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 881 
 
 
[25-A.  2[(a)   Where 3[an accused person has been arrested or 
is in the custody of NAB or apprehends such arrest or custody for the 
investigation of the charge against him of  committing an offence of 
willful default on account of non-payment of dues to a bank or 
financial institution or Co-operative Society, he may at any stage 
before or after such arrest or before, during or after such custody or 
investigation apply to the Governor, State Bank of Pakistan for 
reconciliation of his liability through the Conciliation Committee 
and the Governor may, if he deems fit, refer the matter to the 
Conciliation Committee. 
(aa)   The Governor, State Bank of Pakistan shall constitute 
one or more Conciliation Committees for the purposes of this Ordinance. 
4[(b)     The Conciliation Committee shall consist of a nominee 
of the Governor, State Bank of Pakistan, being a senior officer of the 
State Bank well qualified in the profession of banking who shall be 
the Chairman of the Committee, two nominees of the NAB to be 
nominated by the Chairman NAB, two Chartered Accountants to be 
nominated by the Governor, State Bank of Pakistan, one Chartered 
Accountant to be nominated by the Council of the Institute of Chartered 
Accountants of Pakistan, Karachi, such nomination on to be obtained by 
the Governor, State Bank of Pakistan, a Chartered Accountant to be 
nominated by the 5[accused] and a Chartered Accountant to be 
nominated by the lender bank or financial institution. 
Explanation. - Where the 6[lender] is a consortium or group of 
banks or financial institutions, the lender means the lead bank or 
financial institution. 
(bb) The Chairman of the Conciliation Committee shall convene 
the meetings and conduct proceedings of the 7[Conciliation] Committee 
in the manner he deems fit.  
8[(c) The Conciliation Committee, after examination of the record 
of the lending bank or financial institution and the 9[accused] and after 
hearing the parties through their Chartered10[Accountants], shall 
determine the amount outstanding against the 9[accused] calculated 
in accordance with law, rules, regulations and circulars of the State 
Bank of Pakistan and further determine the manner and the schedule 
of repayment having regard to the facts of each case. The9[accused], 
if he so desires, shall be heard at commencement and before the 
conclusion of proceedings: 
                         
New section 25A ins. by the National Accountability Bureau  (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2000 (4 of 2000), s. 18. 
2Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Second Amdt.) Ordinance, 2000 (24 of 2000), s. 11, for sub-
section (a) which was previously amended by Ord. No. 4 of 2000, s. 18.3 
3Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2002 (133 of 2002), s. 28for ―a person‖. 
4Subs. by Ord. No. 24 of 2000, s. 11, for sub-section (b). 
5Subs. by Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s. 28, for ‗borrower‖. 
6Subs. ibid., for ―Leader‖. 
7Ins. ibid., s. 28. 
8Subs. by Ord. No. 24 of 2000, s. 11, for sub-section (c). 
9Subs. by Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s. 28, for ‗borrower‖. 
10Subs. ibid., for ―Accountant‖. 
Payment of  
loans, etc. 

Page - 882             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
Provided that the borrower shall have the right to have access 
to, and instruct, the Chartered Accountant representing him before 
the Conciliation Committee even if the borrower is in* custody, 
during the proceedings of the Conciliation Committee.] 
(d) 
The Conciliation Committee shall conclude the reference 
within thirty days and its recommendations shall be recorded by its 
Chairman and shall contain the views of all members of 
the 2[Conciliation] Committee. 
The 
recommendation 
of 
the 
Conciliation Committee shall be submitted to the 3[Governor, State 
Bank of Pakistan.] 
4[(e) The Governor, State Bank of Pakistan shall consider the 
recommendations submitted to him under sub-section (d) and may 
accept the recommendations or may, for reasons to be recorded, pass 
such other appropriate order thereon as he deems fit. The acceptance of 
the recommendations of the 2[Conciliation] Committee or passing any 
other order as aforesaid shall constitute the decision of the Governor, 
State Bank of Pakistan.] 
5[(f) Where the 6[accused] undertakes to repay the amount as 
determined by the Conciliation Committee, the Chairman NAB, with 
the approval of the Court, may release the accused.] 
7[(g) The decision of the Governor State Bank of Pakistan 
shall be communicated to the Chairman NAB, which shall be 
binding on him, except for valid reasons to be recorded in writing 
subject to approval of the Court, to be accorded within a period of 
seven days.] 
8[(h) In the event of failure either of the Conciliation 
Committee to conclude the reference within thirty days of the 
commencement of the conciliation proceedings or the failure of 
the 6[accused] to accept and implement the decision of the 
Governor, State Bank of Pakistan regarding the payment and matters 
relating thereto, such failure to accept or implement the decision 
shall be referred to the 9* Court subject to the provisions of Section 
31D and the Court may proceed with the case thereafter: 
 
                         
 The word ―the‖ omitted by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2002 (133 of 2002), s. 28. 
2Ins. ibid., 
3Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Second Amdt.) Ordinance, 2000 (24 of 2000), s. 11, for the 
―Chairman NAB‖. 
4Subs. ibid., for sub-section (e). 
5Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2001 (35 of 2001), s. 23 for sub-section (f), 
which was previously amended by Ord. No. 24 of 2000, s. 11. 
6Subs. by Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s. 28. for ―borrower‖. 
7Subs. by Ord. No. 35 of 2001, for sub-section (g). 
8Subs. by Ords. No. 24 of 2000, s. 11, for sub-section (h). 
 
9The word ―Accountability‖ Omitted by Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s. 28. 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 883 
 
 
Provided that the period of thirty days may be extended by the 
Governor, State Bank of Pakistan by such further period or periods 
as he may find necessary having regard to the facts and circumstances of 
the case and for reasons to be recorded.] 
26. (a) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, at 
any stage of 2[inquiry, investigation or trial], the Chairman 3[NAB] may, 
with a view to obtaining the evidence of any person supposed to 
have been directly or indirectly concerned in or privy to any offence, 
tender a full or conditional pardon to such a person on condition of 
his making a full and true disclosure of the whole of the 
circumstances within his knowledge relating to the said offence 
including the names of the persons involved therein whether as 
principals or abettors or otherwise.  
(b) 
Every person accepting a tender of pardon under  
sub-section (a) shall be examined4[by a Magistrate and shall also be 
examined] as a witness in the subsequent trial. 
(c) 
Subject to sub-section (d), the person to whom pardon 
has been granted under this section shall not — 
(i)   in the case of a full pardon be tried for the offence in respect 
of which the pardon was granted; and 
(ii)   in the case of conditional pardon be awarded a punishment or 
penalty higher or other than that specified in the grant of 
pardon notwithstanding the punishment or penalty authorized 
by law. 
(d) 
Where the Chairman NAB certifies that in his opinion, 
any person who has accepted such tender has, either by willfully 
concealing anything essential or by giving false evidence through 
willful or reckless mis-statement, not complied with the condition on 
which the tender 5[of pardon]was made, such a person may be tried 
for the offence in respect of which the pardon was so tendered, or for 
any other offence of which he appears to have been guilty in 
connection with the said matter including the offence of giving false 
evidence, which he knows or ought to know is false. 
(e) 
Any statement made before 6[a Magistrate] by a person 
who has accepted a tender of pardon may be given in evidence 
against him at 7[the] trial. 
                         
 Certain words omitted by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2002 (133 of 2002), s. 29. 
2Subs. Ibid., ―investigation or inquiry‖ . 
3Ins. ibid., 
4Ins. by the National Accountability Bureau  (Second Amdt.) Ordinance, 2000 (24 of 2000), s. 12. 
5Ins. by Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s. 29. 
6Subs. by Ord. No. 24 of 2000, s. 12, for certain words. 
7Subs. ibid., ―such‖. 
Tender of      
  pardon:1*** 
 

Page - 884             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
27. The Chairman NAB, [or an officer of the NAB duly 
authorized by him,] shall have the power to seek full and complete 
assistance and call for all or any documents and information relevant 
to or in connection with any matter or 2[inquiry or investigation] pending 
before the NAB,3[or disposal of any property surrendered to or 
seized by the NAB,] from any department of the Federal 
Government, Provincial Government, local authority, bank, financial 
Institution, person or any authority and institution or department in 
the public sector or the private sector as he may deem it fit and 
proper to demand or require, provided that in any case in which a 
question of secrecy in involved or is raised at any time, 
the 4[Chairman NAB‘s] decision shall be final. 
5[28. 6[(a) The Chairman NAB, or an officer of the NAB duly 
authorised by him, may appoint such officers and staff as he may 
consider necessary for the efficient performance of 7[the functions of 
the NAB] and exercise of powers under this Ordinance.] 
8*         *          *          *          *          *          * 
(c) 
The officers and members of staff 3[of the NAB] shall be 
entitled to such salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of 
services as the Chairman NAB may, with the approval of 
the 9[President], determine. 
(d) 
Subject to sub-section (e) the provisions of the Civil 
Servants Act, 1973 (LXXI of 1973), shall not apply to the persons 
appointed in 1[or employed by the] NAB. 
(e) 
Nothing contained in sub-section (d) shall apply to a 
person who is a civil servant within the meaning of law relating to 
appointments as civil 10[servants] of the Federation or a Province 
and is deputed to or posted in NAB. 
11[(f) The Chairman NAB, may appoint advisers, consultants 
and experts, on payment of such fee or remuneration as he may 
determine, to assist him in performing the functions of the NAB and 
the discharge of his duties under this Ordinance. 
                         
 Ins. by the National Accountability Bureau (Second Amdt.) Ordinance, 2000 (24 of 2000), s. 13. 
2Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2002 (133 of 2002) s. 30, for ―proceeding‖. 
3Ins. ibid., ss 30 and 31. 
4Subs. ibid., for ―Chairman‘s‖. 
5Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2000 (4 of 2000), s. 19 for the Original 
section 28 
6Subs. by Ord. No. 24 of 2002, s. 14, for sub-section (a), which was previously amended by Ord. No. 4 of 
2000, s. 19. 
7Subs. by the Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s. 31, for ―his functions‖ . 
8Subs-section (b) omitted ibid., 
9Subs-ibid., for ―Chief Executive‖. 
10Subs. ibid., for ―servant‖. 
11New sections (f) and 9(g) added ibid., 
Power to seek 
assistance 
Appointment of 
officer and staff in 
the National 
Accountability 
Bureau 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 885 
 
 
(g)    Notwithstanding anything to contrary contained herein, 
or in any law for the time being in force, the Chairman NAB, shall 
not be required to consult the Federal Public Service Commission 
for making appointments and on matters relating to qualifications of 
persons for such appointments and methods of their recruitment and 
the qualifications for appointments and methods of recruitment shall 
be such as he may by rules prescribe. 
29.  
[An accused] shall be a competent witness for the 
defence and may give evidence on oath in disproof of the charges 
made against him;  
Provided that the accused shall not be compelled to be a 
witness against himself: 
Provided further that, where an accused 2* appears as a witness 
of his own choice and refuses to answer any question, the Court may 
draw such adverse inference from such refusal as it may think proper. 
30. (a) Notwithstanding anything 3[to the contrary] contained 
in 4[this Ordinance] or any other law 5[for the time being] in force, 
on pronouncement of judgment, the 6* Court shall have the 
jurisdiction and power to take cognizance of an offense committed in 
the course of the investigating or trial of a case by any officer, any 
witness, including an expert, who has tendered false evidence in the 
case, whether he deposed in court or not, or any other person, under 
section 176 to 182 of Chapter X, or section 191 to 204, or 211 to 
223, or 225-A of Chapter XI, of the Pakistan Penal Code 1860 (Act 
XLV of 1860), or under any other law relating to false evidence and 
offences against public justice, and to summarily try him and award 
punishment provided for the offence under the law.  
(b) 
For the purposes of trial under sub-section (a), the Court 
may, as nearly as may be, follow the procedure specified in Chapter 
XXII of the Code. 
(c) 
The proceedings under sub-section (a) may be initiated 
by the 7*Court on its own accord at any time after the decision of the 
case or, in the event that there is an appeal, after the decision thereof, 
or on an application made by the 7* 8[prosecution]  9[or the 
accused tried by the Court, within thirty days. 
                         
Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance 2002 (133 of 2002), s. 32, for certain words. 
2The word ―person‖ omitted ibid., 
3Ins ibid., ss. 33 and 34. 
4Subs. ibid., for the ―preceding provisions‖. 
5Subs. ibid., for ―already‖. 
6The word ‗Accountability‖ omitted ibid., 
7Omitted by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2000 (4 of 2000), s. 20. 
8Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2001 (35 of 2001), s. 24, for ―Prosecutor‖. 
9Subs. by Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s. 33, for ―of the person accused of an offence‖. 
Accused to be 
competent  
witness 
False evidence etc. 

Page - 886             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
31.  (a) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law 
for the time being in force, if any person concerned with the 
inquiry 2[,] investigation and prosecution of a case consciously and 
deliberately and with malice 3* compromises, hampers, misleads, 
jeopardizes or defeats an4[inquiry or] investigation of a case under 
process before NAB or any concerned agency or authority or 
the 5[Court or any other Court] he shall be 6[guilty of an offence 
under this Ordinance punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to ten years]. 
(b) 
No person will be proceeded 7[against] under this 
section except with the sanction of a committee 8[comprising]  the 
Chairman NAB, Deputy Chairman NAB and the Prosecutor General 
Accountability. 
9[31-A. 10[(a)] Whoever absconds in order to avoid being served 
with any process issued by any Court or any other authority or officer 
under this Ordinance or in any manner prevents, avoids or evades the 
service on himself of such process or conceals himself to screen himself 
from the proceedings or punishment under this Ordinance shall be guilty 
of an offence 11[under this Ordinance] punishable with imprisonment 
which may extend to three years notwithstanding the provisions of 
section 87 and 88 of 12[Code], or any other law for the time being in 
force. 
  13[(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 18 it shall not 
be necessary to file a reference under this section in cases where a 
reference is pending before the Court. ] 
14[31-B The Prosecutor General Accountability may, with the 
consent of the Court, withdraw from the prosecution of any 
 11[accused] Person generally or in respect of any one or more of the 
offences for which he is tried and upon such withdrawal: 
                         
 Amended by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance 2000 (4 of 2000), s.21 
2Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance 2002 (133 of 2002), s. 34. for ―and‖. 
3The word ―aforethought‖ omitted ibid., 
4Subs. ibid., ss. 33 and 34. 
5Subs. ibid., for ―any court or an court‖ which was previously amended by Ord. No. 4 of 2000, s.21. 
6Subs. ibid., for certain words. 
7Subs. ibid., for ―with‖. 
8Subs. ibid., for ―composing‖. 
9New section 31A, 31B and 31C, ins. by Ord. No. 4  of 2000, s. 22. 
10Relettered as sub-section (a) by Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s. 35. 
11Ins. ibid., ss. 35 and 36 
12Subs. ibid., for ―Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898‖. 
13New sub-section (b) added ibid., 
14Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2001 (35 of 2001), s. 25, or  
section 31B. 
1[Prohibition to  
hamper  
investigation] 
Absconding to  
avoid service of 
warrants.- 
Withdrawal  
from prosecution 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 887 
 
 
(i) 
if it is made before a charge has been framed, the  accused 
shall be discharged in respect of such offence or offences; and 
(ii) if it is made after a charge has been framed, he shall be 
acquitted in respect of such offence or offences.]  
31-C  
No Court established under this Ordinance shall take 
cognizance of an offence against an officer or an employee of a bank 
or financial institution for writing off, waving, restructuring or 
refinancing any financial facility, interest or mark-up without prior 
approval of the State Bank of Pakistan. 
2[31D.  Notwithstanding anything contained in this Ordinance or 
any other law for the time being in force, no inquiry, investigation or 
proceedings in respect of imprudent loans, defaulted loans or 
rescheduled loans shall be initiated or conducted by the National 
Accountability Bureau against any person, company or financial 
institution without reference from Governor, State Bank of Pakistan. 
 Provided that cases pending before any Accountability Court 
before coming into force of the National Accountability Bureau 
(Second Amendment) Ordinance, 2000, shall continue to be 
prosecuted and conducted without reference from the Governor, 
State Bank of Pakistan.] 
 3[31E The Chairman NAB or the Court may in the facts and 
circumstances of a case take such measures as may be considered 
necessary for the safety, security and protection of witnesses and 
their families.] 
32 (a) Any 5[person convicted or the Prosecutor General 
Accountability, if so directed by 6[the Chairman] NAB,] aggrieved 
by the final judgment and order of the Court under this Ordinance 
may, within ten days of the final Judgment and order of the 7* Court 
prefer an appeal to the High Court of the Province where the Court is 
situated 8[:] 
8[Provided that no appeal shall lie against any interlocutory order 
of the Court]. 
                         
Ins. by the National Accountability Bureau (Second Amdt.) Ordinance, 2000 (24 of 2000), s. 15. 
2New section 31D ins. ibid., s. 16. 
3New section 31E, ins. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2001 (35 of 2001), s. 26. 
4added by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2002 (133 of 2002), s. 37. 
5Subs. by the  National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2000 (4 of 2000), s. 23, for ―Party to the 
Proceedings‖. 
6Ins. by Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s. 37. 
7The word ―Accountability‖ omitted ibid., 
8Subs. and ins. by Ord. No. 35 of 2001, s. 27. 
1[Court to take  
cognizance of  
offence with  
prior approval  
of the State Bank.- 
 
Inquiry, investigation or 
proceedings 
 in respect of imprudent 
bank loans, etc. 
 
Protection of 
 witnesses. 
Appeal 4[and 
revision 
 

Page - 888             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
(b) 
All Appeals against the final Judgement *** filed 
before the High Court will be heard by a Bench of not less than two 
judges constituted by the Chief Justice of High Court and shall be 
finally disposed of within thirty days of the filing of the appeal. 
2[(c) No revision shall lie against any interlocutory order of 
the Court]: 
Provided that where a person makes an application for revision 
under this sub-section, he shall, in support of such application, 
furnish copies of the reference, documents and order of the Court 
and the High Court shall dispose of such application within thirty 
days without calling for the record of the Court; 
Provided further that such application shall be made within ten 
days of the decision of the Court, which shall provide a copy of such 
decision within three days thereof. 
 3*         *          *          *          *          *          * 
4[33.   Any and all proceedings pending before a 5[court] under 
the Ehtesab Act, 1997 (IX of 1997), shall stand transferred to 6[a] 
Court as soon as it is constituted under this  Ordinance within the 
same Province, and it shall not be necessary to recall any witness or 
again to record any evidence that may have been recorded]. 
 7[33A.  There may be paid bonuses or ex-gratia 8[payments] to 
the officers and staff of the9[NAB], other Government servants, 
public servants and rewards to members of public for rendering 
commendable services in detection, investigation and prosecution 
of 10[any offence under this Ordinance] as may be prescribed by rules] 
 
                         
 Omitted by the National Accountability Bureau (Second Amdt.) Ordinance, 2000 (24 of 2000), s. 15. 
2Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2002 (133 of 2002), s. 37, for ―sub-section 
(c)‖ which was previously amended by various enactments. 
3Omitted by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2001 (35 of 2001), s. 27. 
4Subs. and shall be deemed always to have been so subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) 
Ordinance, 1999 (19 of 1999, s.2, for the original section 33. 
5Subs. by Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s. 38, for ―Court‖. 
6Subs. ibid., for ―an Accountability‖. 
7New section 33A ins. by Ord. No. 35 of 2001, s. 28. 
8Subs. by Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s. 39. for ―payment ―. 
9Subs. ibid., for ―National Accountability Bureau‖. 
10Subs. ibid., for certain words. 
Transfer of  
pending 
proceedings 
Payment of 
bonuses etc: 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 889 
 
 
 [33B. All Ministries, Divisions and Attached Departments of 
the Federal Government, all departments of Provincial and local 
governments, statutory corporations or authorities established by the 
Federal Government or Provincial Government and holders of public 
office shall furnish to NAB a copy of any contract, entered into by 
such Ministries, Divisions and Attached Departments of the Federal 
Government, all departments of Provincial Government or local 
government, statutory corporations or authorities established by the 
Federal Government or Provincial Government or such holder of 
public office on its behalf, as the case may be, of the minimum 
monetary value of fifty million rupees or more, within such time as is 
reasonably practicable from the date of signing such contract. 
33C.      The Chairman NAB, shall from time to time as he deems 
fit, constitute committees comprising officers of the NAB or other 
persons or organizations from the private or public sectors to— 
(a)  educate and advise public authorities, holders of public 
office and the  community at large on measures to combat 
corruption and corrupt practices; 
(b)  develop, arrange, supervise, participate in or conduct 
educational programmes or media campaigns, and 
generally to disseminate information on the detrimental 
effects of corruption and corrupt practices and the 
importance of maintaining the integrity of public 
administration; 
(c)  
examine the laws in force, and also rules and regulations 
relating to the practice and procedure of various 
ministries, departments of the Federal Government or 
Provincial Government, statutory or other public 
corporations or bodies, and the conduct of holders of 
public office and to recommend amendments in such laws, 
rules or regulations, as the case may be, in order to 
eliminate corruption and corrupt practices; 
(d)  instruct, advise and assist any statutory or other public 
corporation or bodies or upon request, any organization in 
the private and public sector on measures for the reduction 
and elimination of corruption and corrupt practices; and 
(e)  
monitor the implementation of the instructions and advice 
as aforesaid and to assess and evaluate the success or 
otherwise of such instructions and advice on the reduction 
and elimination of corruption and corrupt practices. 
                         
New section 33B, 33D and 33E ins. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2002 (133 of 
2002), s. 40. 
Reporting of 
public contracts 
Measures for the 
prevention of 
corruption and 
corrupt practices 
 

Page - 890             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
33D. The Chairman NAB shall as soon as possible after the 
end of every calendar year but before the last day of March next 
following, submit to the President a report of its affairs for that year 
which report shall be a public document and on its publication 
copies thereof shall be provided to the public at a reasonable cost. 
33E. Any fine or other sum due under this Ordinance, or as 
determined to be due by a Court, shall be recoverable as arrears of 
land revenue.] 
 [34. The Chairman NAB may, with the approval of the 
President, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of this Ordinance.] 
2[34A. The Chairman NAB may, by an order in writing, 
delegate any of his powers to and authorise performance of any of 
his functions by, an officer of the NAB as he may deem fit and 
proper, subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the 
order, for carrying out the purposes of this Ordinance.] 
35.   (a)  The Ehtesab Act 1997 (Act IX of 1997) shall stand 
repealed from the date of promulgation of this Ordinance, provided 
that notwithstanding the repeal of the said Act, any proceedings 
pending under Ordinance CXI of 1996, Ordinance No. XX of 1997 
and the Ehtesab act, 1997, before any Court established under the 
said Act, of 1997 3* or any of the aforesaid Ordinances amending the 
same, shall 4[continue under this Ordinance as transferred under 5*** 
section 33 to 6[a] Court. 
7[(b) Any case or proceeding pending under the aforesaid 
Ordinances and the Act of 1997 immediately before the 
commencement 
of 
this 
Ordinance 
and 
transferred 
to 
any 8[Court] 9***shall be proceeded with and all subsequent 
proceedings shall be completed in accordance with, and under the 
provisions of, this Ordinance.] 
                         
Subs. by the National  Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2002(133 of 2002), s. 41, for section 34, 
which was previously amended by Ord. No. 4 of 2000, s.24, for certain words. 
2New section 34A ins. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance 2001 (35 of 2001), s. 29. 
3The word ―and/‖ omitted by Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s. 42. 
4Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2000 (4 of 2000), s. 25, for certain words, 
which was previously ins. by Ord. No. 19 of 1999. s.4. 
5Omitted by Ord. No. 35 of 2001, s. 30. 
6Subs. by Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s. 42, for ―an Accountability‖. 
7Subs. by Ord. No. 4 of 2000, s. 25, for the original sub-section (b). 
8Subs. by Ord. No. 133 of 2002, s. 42, for ―court‖. 
9The words ―established under this Ordinance‖ omitted ibid., 
NAB to submit  
an annual  
report 
Recovery of amount 
of fines, etc., as 
arrears of land 
revenue 
Power to make 
rules 
Delegation of 
Powers 
 
Repeal 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 891 
 
 
36.   No suit, prosecution, or any other proceedings shall lie 
against the Federal Government, Provincial Government, Chairman 
NAB, or any other member of the NAB or any person exercising any 
power or performing any function under this Ordinance or the Rules 
made hereunder for any act or thing which has been done in good 
faith or intended to be done under this Ordinance or the rules 
thereof. 
[37. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to any provision of 
this Ordinance, the2[Chairman NAB] 3[with the approval of the 
President], may make such order, not inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Ordinance, as may appear to him to be necessary 
for the purpose of removing such difficulty.]  
4[―THE SCHEDULE] 
[See section 10(b)] 
 
S.No. 
Offences 
Punishment 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
1. 
Any person who aids, abets or 
through 
any 
willful 
act 
or 
omissions instrumental in the 
commission of the offence of 
willful default or with wrongful 
intent for illegal gratification by 
misuse 
of 
power, 
authority, 
influence, nepotism, favouritism 
writes off, waives, restructures or 
refinances illegally, improperly or 
without sufficient justification the 
principal amount of loan on any 
financial 
facility, 
interest 
or 
markup on any loan or financial 
facility provided to any person by 
any bank or financial institution, a 
cooperative 
society, 
a 
Government department or an 
authority established or controlled 
by the Government shall have 
committed or be deemed to 
Rigorous imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to fourteen  years and fine. 
                                                            
  
                         
Subs. by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2001 (35 of 2001), s. 31. for section 37. 
2Subs by the National Accountability Bureau (Amdt.) Ordinance, 2002 (133 of 2002), s. 43 for ―President‖. 
3Subs. ibid., for certain words. 
4Subs. ibid., for ―the Schedule‖ which was previously amended by various enactment. 
Removal of 
Difficulties Order 
Indemnity 

Page - 892             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
S.No. 
Offences 
Punishment 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
have committed the offence of 
corruption or corrupt practices. 
2. 
Refuses to answer questions, or 
to provide information to any 
member of the NAB or any 
other agency when required to 
do so. 
Rigorous imprisonment for a term  
which may  extend to five years 
3. 
Giving 
false 
information 
or 
fabricating false evidence during 
inquiry into or investigation of an 
offence by the NAB or any 
agency authorised by the NAB in 
this regard when given by- 
(a)   a complainant, witness or an 
accused person or any inquiry 
officer; and 
(b)   the investigator of the 
National Accountability Bureau or 
concerned agency.        
Rigorous imprisonment for a term, 
which may extend   to five years. 
  
 
 
 
Rigorous imprisonment for a term 
 
which may extend to ten years. 
4. 
 Misuse of authority or power 
in committing any offence 
specified 
above, 
by 
any 
person holding a public office 
including any offence under 
sections 161 to 165A of the 
Pakistan Penal Code (Act 
XLV of 1860). 
 
Rigorous imprisonment for a term 
 
which may extend to fourteen years 
  
5. 
Deceitfully, fraudulently or 
dishonestly causing loss to a 
bank, a financial institution, a 
co-operative 
society, 
a 
Government 
department, a 
statutory body or an authority 
established or controlled by 
the Federal Government, a 
Provincial Government. or a 
local government.  
Rigorous 
imprisonment 
for 
a 
term which may extend to fourteen 
years.‖. 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 893 
 
 
S.No. 
Offences 
Punishment 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
65. Omitted vide SRO (I)2008 
dated 24th Oct 2008 
  
7. 
Omitted vide SRO (I)2008 
dated 24th Oct 2008 
  
  
8. 
Omitted vide SRO (I)2008 
dated 24th Oct 2008 
  
  
9. 
Omitted vide SRO (I)2008 
dated 24th Oct 2008 
  
  
10. Omitted vide SRO (I)2008 
dated 24th Oct 2008 
  
  
11. Omitted vide SRO (I)2008 
dated 24th Oct 2008 
  
  
12. Omitted vide SRO (I)2008 
dated 24th Oct 2008 
  
  
13. Omitted vide SRO (I)2008 
dated 24th Oct 2008 
  
  
14. Omitted vide SRO (I)2008 
dated 24th Oct 2008 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                         
5 S.# 6 to 14 included in the Schedule vide Law Division‘s notification SRO (I)/2003 dated 20 -11-
2003 (F.# 1(3)-Admin-V). 

Page - 894             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
 
35.1 Queries about Review Exercise 
 
Queries have been raised by different quarters whether review exercise for 
retirement of civil servants is also applicable to the employees of autonomous bodies or 
not and whether the provisions of the Civil Servants Act, 1973 and amendments therein 
are also applicable to them or not.  The position is clarified as under:– 
(i) 
Supreme Court in their judgement in Civil Appeals Nos.154 and 155 of 1988 
held that organizations established through Resolutions were not bodies 
corporate but government departments and their employees were held to be 
civil servants.  In the light of the aforesaid decision of the Supreme Court, Civil 
Servants Act, 1973 and the rules made thereunder are applicable to the 
employees of organizations established through Resolutions. 
(ii) 
In case of autonomous bodies which are bodies corporate and are 
administered or controlled by Federal Government, and have their own 
service rules/regulations, it is necessary to make enabling provision in their 
service rules/regulations on the lines of section 13(1)(i) of Civil Servants 
Act, 1973. 
 
2. 
Ministries/Divisions are advised to take necessary action for making 
enabling provision in the Service Rules/ Regulations of Bodies Corporate which are under 
their administrative control. 
[Authority.– Establishment Division‘s O.M.No.8/31/2000-R.3, dated 11-10-2000]. 
 
35.2 
Clarification Regarding Option of  
Seeking Premature Retirement 
 
 
The amended section 13(1)(i) of the Civil Servants Act, 1973 lays down that– 
 
―(1)  a civil servant shall retire from service– 
(i) 
On such date after he has completed twenty years of service qualifying for 
pension and other retirement benefits as the competent authority may, in 
public interest, direct. 
 
2.  
However, queries have been received in the Establishment Division 
soliciting advice on the point as to whether, or not, a civil servant can seek voluntary 
retirement on completion of twenty years of service qualifying for pension and other 
retiring benefits under section 13(1)(i) of the Civil Servants Act, 1973. 
 
3. 
As such, it is clarified that there is no provision in the Civil Servants Act, 
1973 under which a civil servant can seek voluntary retirement on completion of twenty 
years of service qualifying for pension and other retirement benefits. However, all 
government servants have the right to seek retirement – if they so desire – on the 

CHAPTER-8            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                Page - 895 
 
 
completion of twenty five years service qualifying for pension and other retirement 
benefits (under CSR 465-B). This right is, however, subject to the provisions of the 
Essential Services Maintenance Act 1952 and is not available to a civil servant against 
whom the departmental inquiry/proceedings are pending. 
[Authority.– Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.3/8/2000/R.2, dated 22-10-2001]. 
 
35.3 Implications of Release of a Government Servant  
 
 
under Section 25 of Ordinance No. XVIII of 1999  
 
 
for Disciplinary Proceedings 
 
Section 25 of NAB Ordinance (Ordinance No. XVIII of 1999) lays down, inter 
alia as under:- 
 
―25. (a) Where at any time whether before or after the commencement of trial the 
holder of a public notice or any other person accused of any offence under this Ordinance, 
returns to the NAB, the assets or gains acquired through corruption or corrupt practices,- 
(i) 
if the trial has not commenced, the Chairman NAB may release the accused; 
and 
(ii) 
if the Court has taken cognizance of the offence or the trial has commenced, 
the Chairman NAB may, with the approval of the Court, release the accused. 
 
2. 
A question had arisen whether release of a government servant under 
section 25 should be construed as an order of conviction, and thereby automatically 
disqualify him for holding the office which he was holding prior to initiation of proceedings 
against him under the said Ordinance. The matter has been examined in consultation with the 
Law and Justice Division and correct legal position is clarified below:- 
 
(a) 
The voluntary return of gains and release of the accused for return of 
money are matters unconnected with the terms and conditions of service of 
civil servants. Neither any presumption can be drawn against him nor he 
can be considered disqualified only on such facts unless the civil servant 
concerned is subjected to disciplinary proceedings as per provisions of the 
law and the rules. 
 
(b) 
Though the release of a government servant under section 25 of the said 
Ordinance does not automatically disqualify him for holding his office but 
it makes him liable to face disciplinary proceedings in regard to charges of 
corruption mentioned in section 25 of Ordinance No. XVIII of 1999 but 
this liability should be without prejudice to the right of a government 
servant to:  
 
(i) 
be informed in writing about the action proposed to be taken against 
him and the grounds of the action; and 

Page - 896             ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                              CHAPTER-8     
           
 
 
(ii) 
be given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the 
action proposed to be taken against him. 
 
3. 
If follows from the above stated position that the Ministry/ Division/ 
Department concerned is required to initiate disciplinary proceedings in accordance with 
the law, if a government servant is released under section 25 of the NAB Ordinance. 
 
4. 
The above clarification is being circulated for information and guidance of 
all Ministries/Divisions/Departments. 
[Authority: Estt. Div.‘s OM No. 3/65/2000-R.2, dated 3rd November 2000] 
Sl.No.36 
Employment/Re-employment of Persons Penalized Under the Government Servants 
(Efficiency & Discipline) Rules, 1973 and the Removal from Service (Special 
Powers) Ordinance, 2000  
 
Reference the Estab. Div.‘s OM No. 22/4/71-F.1, dated 3-4-1973 under which 
Ministries/Divisions/Departments were required to consult the list circulated by the 
Establishment Division, of persons dismissed from government service for consultation 
before making fresh appointments. As the number of Ministries/ Divisions/Departments 
and government servants both have increased tremendously since the issuance of above 
referred instructions neither the information required for preparation of lists from the 
Ministries/Divisions is received nor has it now been possible to prepare and circulate lists, 
keeping in view the voluminous data. Further, to reduce the workload and in the public 
interest, powers to initiate and finalize disciplinary proceedings in cases of employees 
from BPS-1 to BPS 19 and equivalent stand delegated to the respective authorities. 
 
2. 
It has now been decided that, in case of a person having served somewhere 
under the government before his candidature for fresh appointment or re-employment, 
Ministries/Divisions/Departments shall consult the parent organization of the person to be 
appointed/re-employed to find out whether he was penalized under the Government 
Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules, 1973 or the *Removal from Service (Special 
Powers) Ordinance, 2000 or had retired from service voluntarily. If a person is found to 
have been dismissed from service or retired on his request, he shall not be appointed/re-
employed. In case of other penalties, the appointing authority may decide whether a 
penalized candidate may or may not be appointed/re-employed. 
[Authority: Estab. Div.‘s O.M. No. 12/1/2006-D.2, dated 29th March, 2006] 
 
______________________ 
                         
 Now Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules, 2020. 
 Removal from Service (Special Powers) Ordinance, 2000 has been ceased to exit. 

CHAPTER 9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RETIREMENT AND SEVERANCE  
(897-898) 
 

 CHAPTER-9                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                             Page - 899 
 
 
CHAPTER 9 
 
RETIREMENT AND SEVERANCE  
 
Sl.  
No(s). 
Chapter Contents 
Page 
No(s). 
 
PART-I 
RETIREMENT & SEVERANCE  
AND  
RE-EMPLOYMENT  
 
 
I. RETIREMENT FROM SERVICE 
(STATUTORY PROVISIONS) 
 
 
1.1 Retirement on Completion of Sixtieth Year of Age ................................... 903-904 
 
1.2 Authorities Competent to Accept Requests for Retirement ....................... 904-905 
 
1.3 Retirement on Completion of 25 years Service-Right to Retire 
Through  ........................................................................... Written  Intima
905 
 
1.4 Retirement on Completion of 25 years Service Qualifying for Pension 
(General Instructions) – Retiring Pension .................................................
905-906 
 
1.5 Withdrawal of Applications for Premature Retirement .............................
906 
 
1.6 Voluntary Retirement of Government Servants.........................................
906 
 
1.7 Notifying Retirement of an Officer on Attaining the Age of 
Superannuation ..........................................................................................
907 
 
1.8 Recall to Duty After Premature Retirement ...............................................
907 
 
2.1 Grant of Medical Allowance to Civil Pensioners of the Federal Governm907-908 
 
2.2 Grant of Medical Allowance to Civil Employees/Pensioners of the 
Federal Government ........................................................................................
908-909 
 
2.3 Grant of Medical Allowance to Civil Pensioners of the Federal 
Government 
909-910 
 
3.1 
Traveling Allowance for Journey on Retirement (For Mission Abroad) 
910 
 
3.2 Revision of Traveling Allowance Rules (Within Pakistan) ....................... 910-911 
 
3.3 T.A. for Journey on Retirement-Cost of Transportation of Personal 
Car/ Motorcycle/Scooter ...........................................................................
911 
 
3.4 T.A. for Journey on Retirement – Determination of Home Town .............
912 
 
3.5 Time-Limit for Availing of the Concession of Traveling Allowance 
After Retirement ........................................................................................
912 
 
3.6 T.A. for Journey on Retirement-Admissibility of T.A. to Employees 
with Home Towns of Gilgit Baltistan and Chitral .....................................
913 
 
3.7 Time Limit for Availing of the Concession of Traveling Allowance 
After Retirement – Admissibility in Re-employment in Government .......
913 
 
3.8 Revision of Transfer Grant, Transportation of Motorcar/ Motorcycle/ 
Scooter and Mileage Allowance......................................................................
914-915 
 
II.  RE-EMPLOYMENT 
 
 
4.1 Employment 
after 
Retirement- 
Policy 
and 
Procedure 
– 
Re-employment After Superannuation .......................................................
916-917 

    Page - 900                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                 CHAPTER-9 
 
 
Sl.  
No(s). 
Chapter Contents 
Page 
No(s). 
 
4.2 Indication of Date of Superannuation of Officers Proposed for 
Appointment to Tenure Posts ....................................................................
917-918 
 
4.3 Re-employment of Civil Servants After Compulsory Retirement or 
Termination of Service ....................................................................................
918 
 
4.4 Re-employment During Refused L.P.R ..........................................................
918 
 
4.5 Re-employment after Superannuation by Corporations/ Autonomous 
Bodies ..............................................................................................................
918-919 
 
4.6 Cabinet Decision Regarding Re-employment .................................................
919 
 
4.7 Re-employment Beyond Superannuation in Unavoidable Cases....................
919 
 
5.1 Continuation in Service Beyond Superannuation ...................................... 919-920 
 
5.2 Guard Against Unauthorised Overstayal after Superannuation/on Expiry 
of the Period of Contract Re-employment ......................................................
920-921 
 
5.3 Request for Re-employment by Officers Retired Voluntarily ........................
921 
 
5.4    Permission to Seek Private Employment  by Civil Servants During 
LPR  and Within Two Years of Retirement ........................................................
921-922 
 
5.5    Permissions Granted by the Provincial Governments to Officers of All Pa
923 
 
6.1 
Ex-Government Servants (Employment with Foreign Governments) (P 923-924 
 
6.2 Ex-Government Servants Employed by UN Agencies ...................................
924 
 
6.3 Production of Certificate of Physical Fitness by Retired  Government 
Servants on Re-employment to Gazetted Posts ...............................................
924-925 
 
6.4 Re-employment and Medical Examination ..................................................... 925-926 
 
 
6.5 Fixation of Pay and Allowances of Re-employed Government 
Servants – Principles for Fixation of Pay ..................................................
926-927 
 
6.6 Grant 
of 
Allowances 
During 
Re-employment/Contractual 
Appointment ..............................................................................................
927-928 
 
6.7 Fixation of Pay of Retired Government Servants Civil/Military 
Re-employed Under the Government and in Autonomous Bodies ............
928-929 
 
6.8 Principle of Equivalence – Defence Services and National Pay Scales .......... 929-930 
 
7.1 Re-employment – Pay Fixation ....................................................................
930 
 
7.2 Refixation of Pay After Introduction of Revised National Pay Scales ...... 930-932 
 
7.3 Leave Salary Admissible During Re-employment ....................................
932 
 
PART-II 
TERMINATION OF SERVICES 
& 
DIRECTORY RETIREMENT  
 
 
I.   TERMINATION OF SERVICES 
 
 
 
8.1 C.S.R. 436. Notice of Discharge on the Abolition of Post to  ........ Perman
 
Employees ......................................................................................................
933 
 
8.2 Termination of Service of Temporary Government Servants .........................
934 
 
8.3 Termination of Services of Officers Employed on Contract ..........................
934 

 CHAPTER-9                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                             Page - 901 
 
 
Sl.  
No(s). 
Chapter Contents 
Page 
No(s). 
 
II. REVERSION 
 
 
9.1 Reversion to Lower Grade/Post ...................................................................
935 
 
9.2 Imposition of Penalty for Specific Period .......................................................
935 
 
9.3 Reversion to Parent Group/Cadre ...................................................................
935 
 
9.4 Reversion of Ad-Hoc Appointees ................................................................... 935-936 
 
9.5 Departmental Promotion Committee not Concerned with Demotions/ 
Reversions .......................................................................................................
936 
 
III. RESIGNATION FROM GOVERNMENT SERVICE 
 
 
10.1 Acceptance of Resignation During Pendency of Disciplinary  .. Proceedi937-938 
 
10.2 Withdrawal of Resignation by Government Servants ....................................
938 
 
 
10.3 Proposal for Resignation and Original Letter of Resignation ......................... 938-939 
 
10.4 Resignation of Temporary Government Servants ..........................................
939 
 
10.5 Proposals for Resignation to be Self-Contained .............................................
939 
 
10.6 Procedure for Processing of Cases of Resignation of Officers .......................
940 
 
10.7 Absence from Duty Without Leave ................................................................
940 
 
IV. DIRECTORY RETIREMENT 
 
 
11 
Civil Servants (Directory Retirement from Service) Rules,2020 ................. 941-944 
 
_______________ 
 

    Page - 902                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                 CHAPTER-9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 CHAPTER-9                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                             Page - 903 
 
 
CHAPTER 9 
RETIREMENT AND SEVERANCE 
PART-I 
RETIREMENT & SEVERANCE  
AND  
RE-EMPLOYMENT  
I.   Retirement from Service  
   (Statutory Provisions) 
 
1.1 
Retirement on Completion  
 
 
of Sixtieth Year of Age 
 
Sections 13 & 19 of Civil Servants Act, 1973 which provides the legal provisions 
for retirement, are reproduced below:—  
 
13. [Retirement from service.–(1) A civil servant shall retire from service– 
(i)  
on such date after he has completed [twenty] years of service qualifying for 
pension or other retirement benefits as the competent authority may, in public 
interest, direct; or 
(ii)  where no direction is given under clause (i), on the completion of the 
sixtieth year of his age. 
 
(2)  No direction under clause (i) of sub-section (1) shall be made until the 
civil servant has been informed in writing of the grounds on which it is proposed to make 
the direction, and has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the 
said direction. 
 
Explanation: In this Section, ―competent authority‖ means the appointing 
authority prescribed in rule 6 of the Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and 
Transfer) Rules, 1973]. 
 
19.  Pension and Gratuity.– (1) On retirement from service, a civil servant 
shall be entitled to receive such pension or gratuity as may be prescribed. 
 
(2)   In the event of the death of a civil servant, whether before or after retirement, 
his family shall be entitled to receive such pension, or gratuity, or both, as may be prescribed. 
 
(3) 
No pension shall be admissible to a civil servant who is dismissed or 
removed from service for reasons of discipline, but Government may sanction 
compassionate allowance to such a civil servant, not exceeding two-thirds of the pension 
or gratuity which would have been admissible to him had he been invalided from service 
on the date of such dismissal or removal. 
                                                          
 Subs. vide Civil Servants (Amendment) Ordinance No. XX of 2000, dated 1-6-2000. 
 Subs. vide Civil Servants (Amendment) Ordinance No. XXXIV of 2001, promulgated on 4-8-2001. 

    Page - 904                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                 CHAPTER-9 
 
 
 
(4) 
If the determination of the amount of pension or gratuity admissible to a 
civil servant is delayed beyond one month of the date of his retirement or death, he or his 
family, as the case may be, shall be paid provisionally such anticipatory pension or 
gratuity as may be determined by the prescribed authority, according to the length of 
service of the civil servant which qualifies for pension or gratuity; and any over payment 
consequent on such provisional payment shall be adjusted against the amount of pension 
or gratuity finally determined as payable to such civil servant or his family. 
[Authority:- Civil Servants Act, 1973, Sections 13 & 19.] 
 
1.2 
Authorities Competent to Accept  
Requests for Retirement   
 
A reference is invited to the Establishment Division's Office Memorandum No. 
1/2/67-CV, dated the 6th December, 1967 (Annex) in which it was stated that it was not 
necessary to submit requests for retirement on completion of 25 years' qualifying service to 
the President for orders where the appointing authority was the *President. This was so 
because government had allowed all civil servants the right to apply for retirement and the 
intimation of intention to retire once submitted by a civil servant was final and could not be 
modified or withdrawn.  This right of the civil servant is, however, subject to the provisions 
of the Essential Services (Maintenance) Act, and is not available to a civil servant against 
whom a departmental enquiry is pending.  The question has, therefore, arisen as to which 
authority is competent to accept such requests for retirement. It has been decided that 
requests for retirement of officers of BPS mentioned in column 1 below should be  submitted 
to the Authority mentioned in column 2 for orders:— 
Sr.  
BPS  of officers  
 
      Authority competent to accept  
No. 
 
 
 
 
 
Request for retirement 
 (i)  
BPS  21 and above......... 
 
Prime Minister. The summary after   approval 
by the Minister concerned would be 
submitted 
through 
the 
Establishment 
Division. 
 **(ii) 
BPS 17 to 20 ............ 
 
Secretary of the Ministry/Division which 
administratively 
controls 
the 
cadre 
or 
department to which the post belongs. 
 ** (iii) BPS 16................... 
Head of Department.  
 
** (iv) BPS 1 to 15..............  
Head of Department or Head of Office.  
[Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s O.M.No.1/5/73-CV, dated 6-6-1974]. 
 
 
 
                                                          
 Prime Minister. 
Note.— Competent Authorities may be meant as described under Rule 6(1) &(2) of the (Appointment, 
Promotion and Transfer) Rules,1973. 

 CHAPTER-9                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                             Page - 905 
 
 
(ANNEX I) 
[Copy of Establishment Division O.M. No. 1/2/67-CV, dated 06.12.1967] 
Subject:— 
Right to retire on a retiring pension after completing 25 years qualifying 
service-Policy. 
 
A point has been raised whether or not the approval of the President (where the 
President is the appointing authority) is required for the termination of services of a Class I 
officer who opts for retirement in pursuance of paragraph (5) of the Ministry of Finance 
O.M. No. O.B. 2/12/63-IMP (I), dated the 18th  August, 1966. 
 
2.  
The point has been examined in the Establishment Division and it has been 
decided in consultation with the Law Division that it is unnecessary to submit such cases to 
the President**. Only such cases of officers of and above the level of heads of major 
departments and Joint Secretaries to the Federal Government may be submitted to the 
President** for information. 
1.3 
Retirement on Completion of 25 Years  
Service – Right to Retire Through  
Written Intimation 
 
A question has been raised whether a government servant who intends to retire after 
completing 25 years service qualifying for pension, can submit a written intimation of his 
intention to retire even before completing 25 years qualifying service. 
 
2.  
The matter has been examined, in consultation with the Law Division and the 
Finance Division, and it has been decided that the right to retire from service accrues to a 
government servant only after he has completed 25 years' service qualifying for pension.  As 
such, he can exercise the said option and submit a written intimation of his intention to retire 
only after the date of completion of his 25 years' service qualifying for pension.  Application 
for L.P.R***., if due, shall also be submitted after that date. 
 
3.  
If a government servant desires to leave service before completion of his 25 
years' service qualifying for pension, he may do so by tendering resignation from service. In 
that case he will not be entitled to any pensionary benefits. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 23/2/81-CV (A), dated 12-4-1981]. 
 
1.4 
Retirement on Completion of 25 Years  
Service Qualifying for Pension  
(General Instructions) - Retiring Pension 
 
Subject to the provisions of the Essential Services (Maintenance) Act, 1952, all 
government servants shall have the right to retire on a retiring pension after completing 25 
years qualifying service, provided that a government servant, who intends to retire before 
                                                          
 Prime Minister 
 BPS 17 and above. 
*** Leave Preparatory to Retirement. 

    Page - 906                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                 CHAPTER-9 
 
 
attaining the age of superannuation, shall, at least (Six) months before the date on which he 
intends to retire, submit a written intimation to the authority which appointed him, indicating 
the date on which he intends to retire. Such an intimation, once submitted, shall be final and 
shall not be allowed to be modified or withdrawn. [The right given by this paragraph shall not, 
however, be available to government servant against whom a departmental enquiry is 
pending]. 
[Authority.- Para 5 of the Finance Division‘s O.M. No. O.B.2/12/63-IMP(I), dated 18-8-1966  
as amended vide Finance Div.‘s O.M No. OB.2/12/63-Imp. (1), dated 14.12. 1967]. 
 
1.5 
Withdrawal of Applications  
 
 
for Premature Retirement 
 
According to ―Note 1‖ below Article 465-B/CSR, a written intimation once 
submitted by a government servant who intends to retire after completing 25 years service 
qualifying for pension, shall be final and shall not be allowed to be modified or withdrawn. 
 
2.  
The matter has been examined, in consultation with the Law Division and the 
Finance Division, and it has been decided that, in partial modification of the existing 
rules/orders, if a government servant withdraws his application for premature retirement or 
modifies the date of retirement, before its acceptance by the competent authority, the 
application or the date of retirement shall be deemed to have been withdrawn or modified, as 
the case may be. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 23/2/81-CV (B), dated 12-4-1981]. 
 
1.6 
Voluntary Retirement of  
Government Servants 
 
Refer to para 5 of Finance Division O.M No. OB.2/63-IMP(I) dated 18-08-1966 
according to which the right to seek voluntary retirement accrues to a Government servant 
after he has completed 25 years of qualifying service for pension. A number of cases have 
come to the notice of Finance Division in which it was found, after such an application for 
retirement under para 5 of the O.M referred to above has been submitted and accepted by the 
competent authority and the government servant had actually retired, that the 25 years 
qualifying service for pension had not been rendered e.g. the period of extra-ordinary leave 
had not been excluded from service. As such the government servant became altogether 
ineligible for pension, which caused hardship. In order to avoid recurrence of such cases in 
future and to avoid resultant hardship to the retired government servant concerned it has been 
decided that the application on for retirement after completion of 25 years qualifying service 
must be accompanied by particulars as in the enclosed form. These particulars are based on 
the pension application form and are intended for the purpose of calculating qualifying 
service. On receipt of the application, the Head of Department should arrange verification of 
the qualifying service by the Audit Officer within one month from the date of the receipt of 
the application before orders of retirement are passed.  
[Authority.— Finance Division O.M No. F.8(5)-Reg (6)/73 dated 4th January,1975] 
 
                                                          
Amended in terms of CSR 907. 

 CHAPTER-9                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                             Page - 907 
 
 
   
1.7 
Notifying Retirement of an  
Officer on Attaining the Age  
of Superannuation  
 
It has come to notice of the Establishment Division that in some cases no 
notification was issued regarding retirement of the officer who retired from service on 
attaining the age of superannuation, i.e., the age of 60 years. The absence of a notification 
regarding the retirement led to delay in payment of the pension and other dues. The 
matter has, therefore, been considered by the Establishment Division and it is stated that 
while a notification may not be necessary in the case of officers who attain the age of 
superannuation for retiring them from service, it is necessary to notify the retirement of 
such officers to all concerned for the recovery of dues from the officers, if any, and to 
facilitate payment of pension and other dues of the officers. The Ministries/Divisions are, 
therefore, requested to ensure that retirement of officers working under them are notified 
well in time even if the officer concerned does not take leave preparatory to retirement. In 
case the retiring officer is on deputation with the Ministry/ Division or with any of their 
Attached Departments/ Subordinate Offices and the orders regarding his retirement are to 
be issued by his parent Ministry/Department, that Ministry/ Department may please be 
informed of the date of retirement of the officer so that they may issue notification 
regarding his retirement. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.8/22/75-C.I., dated 26-2-1976]. 
 
1.8 
Recall to Duty After Premature Retirement  
 
Attention is invited to Establishment Division's O.M. No.23/2/81-CV(B) dated 
12.4.1981 according to which option to withdraw or modify the request for premature 
retirement is available to a government servant only before the said request is accepted by 
the competent authority. Requests for premature retirement once accepted by the 
competent authority, cannot, repeat cannot, be allowed to be withdrawn or modified. 
Recall to duty after acceptance of request for voluntary retirement amounts to re-
employment for which approval of the Prime Minister is required. 
 
2.  
Ministries/Divisions are requested to bring the above position to the notice 
of all concerned including their attached departments and subordinate offices, 
autonomous and semi-autonomous organizations, etc., to ensure strict compliance with 
the above stated provision.  
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. F. 14/10/95-R.2 dated 25-8-1996]. 
 
2.1 
Grant of Medical Allowance to Civil  
Pensioners of the Federal Government  
 
The sanction of the President to the introduction of Medical Allowance with 
effect from 1st July, 2010 to all civil pensioners of the Federal Government including 
civilians paid from Defence Estimates and Civil Armed Forces at the following rates:— 
(i) 
Pensioners who retired in BPS 1-15 @15% of pension drawn. 
(ii) 
Pensioners who retired/will retire in BPS 16-22 @20% of pension drawn. 

    Page - 908                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                 CHAPTER-9 
 
 
 
2. 
The medical allowance will be allowed after allowing increases in family 
pension, pension and minimum pension notified vide following O.Ms:- 
 
i. 
No.F2(3)-Reg.6/2010 
 
dated 05-07-2010. 
 
ii. 
No.F.4(1)-Reg.6/2010 
 
dated 05-07-2010. 
 
iii. 
No.F.15(1)-Reg./2010 
 
dated 05-07-2010. 
 
3. 
The re-employed pensioners will be allowed medical allowance after 
allowing increases in pension on notional basis as increases in pension are not admissible to 
them during re-employment. 
 
4. 
The existing facility of reimbursement of amounts spent on account of 
purchase of medicines by the retired Government servants and local purchase of medicines 
by Government Hospitals for Outdoor Patients (OPD) will be discontinued. However, the 
existing facilities for consultation and diagnostic investigations at OPD will continue as 
before. Reimbursement/Local Purchase on account of Cancer, Hepatitis B,C and Insulin 
dependent diabetes would be admissible for OPD patients. The existing facility of 
reimbursement of all kinds of expenditure on account of indoor Medical Treatment will 
continue as before. 
[Authority:- Finance Division‘s O.M.No.F.16(1)-Reg.6/2010-778 dated 5th July,2010]. 
 
2.2 
Grant of Medical Allowance to  
Civil Employees/Pensioners of  
the Federal Government 
 
In partial modification of Finance Division‘s O.Ms. No. 1(1)Imp/2010-622 and 
No.F.16(1) Reg-6/2010-778, both of dated 5th July,2010 regarding the subject mentioned 
above, that it has been decided in consultation with Ministry of Health that serving/retired 
civil employees of the Federal Government or member of his/her family suffering from the 
following chronic diseases, will be entitled for reimbursement of amount spent on account of 
purchase of medicines for the medical treatment at OPD:—    
(1) 
Chronic pulmonary-cardiovascular and circulatory disorders. 
(2) 
Tumours, malignancies, cancer and chronic blood disorders (Thallasaemias 
etc). 
(3) 
Chronic hepato-renal disorders, organ failure, dialysis and transplants. 
(4) 
Chronic neuro-psychiatric diseases, neuropathies, epilepsy, paralysis. 
(5) 
Chronic inflammatory-infectious diseases (rheumatoid, arthritis, hepatitis, 
TB, tetanus etc.) 
(6) 
Chronic endocrine disorder (diabetes/goiter pancreatitis etc). 
(7) 
Chronic degenerative disorders. 
(8) 
Poisoning, dog and snake bite. 
(9) 
Drug Abuse, STD,HIV/AIDS, VHF. 
(10) Chronic skin diseases, allergies-chronic connective tissue and auto immune 
                                                          
 Now Ministry of National Health Services Regulations and Coordination. 

 CHAPTER-9                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                             Page - 909 
 
 
disorders.  
(11) Injuries including orthopaedics, burns, gunshot, blast and head injuries. 
(12) Day surgery (obstetric-gynae disorders, deliveries, cataract and eye/ENT day 
procedures). 
(13) Shock, cardiogenic shock, stroke and electrolyte disorders. 
(14) Treatment for eye, ENT and disabilities/handicaps. 
(15) Dental treatment. 
 
2. 
[X  
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X] 
 
3. 
Ministry of Health will issue necessary instructions for constitution of a 
Medical Board at each Government Hospital, which will examine the serving/retired 
Government servant or a member of his/her family and decide suffering from chronic 
disease, not covered under the above stated list, for reimbursement of medical expenses 
incurred for the treatment in OPD and their decision shall be final. 
[Authority:-Finance Division‘s O.M. No.F.6(1)R-10/2010-171-2011 dated 24-03-2011]. 
Clarification for the Grant of Medical Allowance to Civil Employees/ Pensioners of 
the Federal Government 
 
Refer to Finance Division‘s O.M. of even number dated 24th March,2011 on the 
above subject and to clarify that provisions of the said O.M. are applicable to all 
serving/retired Civil Employees (Gazetted/Non-Gazetted) of the Federal Government 
with effect from 1st July,2010. 
[Authority:-Finance Division‘s O.M. No. F.6(1)R-10/2010-564 dated 5th July,2011]. 
 
2.3 
Grant of Medical Allowance to  
Civil Pensioners of the Federal  
Government 
 
Refer to Finance Division‘s O.M.No.F.16(1)-Reg.66/2010-778 dated 5th 
July,2010 and to state that the Government introduced Medical Allowance with effect 
from 1st July,2010 to all civil pensioners of the Federal Government including civilians 
paid from Defence Estimates and Civil Armed Forces. 
 
2. 
In terms of para-22 of Finance Division‘s O.M. No.F.1(5)-Imp/2011-419 
dated 04-07-2011 it was decided that:- 
(i) 
Medical Allowance admissible to the existing retired Civil Servants in 
BPS-1 to BPS-15 and BPS-16 to BPS-22 @ 25% and @ 20% of the net 
pension respectively shall continue to be admissible at the frozen level of 
its admissibility as on 30-06-2011 till further order. 
(ii) 
All the Civil Servants in BPS-1 to BPS-15 and in BPS-16 to BPS-22, who 
shall retire on or after 01-07-2011 onwards, shall be allowed Medical 
Allowance @ 25% and @ 20% of the net pension respectively and shall 
                                                          
 Now Ministry of National Health Services Regulations and Coordination. 

    Page - 910                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                 CHAPTER-9 
 
 
stand frozen at the same level.  
 
3. 
Now the President has been pleased to sanction, w.e.f. 01-07-2015 until 
further orders 25% increase in the amount of medical allowance being drawn by the civil 
pensioners of Federal Government, civilian paid from Defence Estimates and Civil 
Armed Forces and to the future retirees on the medical allowance admissible to them at 
the time to retirement and shall stand frozen at same level. 
[Authority:-Finance Division‘s O.M.No.16(1)-Reg.6/2015-698 dated 07-07-2015]. 
 
3.1 
Traveling Allowance for Journey  
on Retirement (For Mission Abroad) 
 
Grant of T.A. on Retirement of Government Servants Posted in Missions 
Abroad. The President has been pleased to sanction the grant of T.A. as admissible under 
the rules on retirement within a period of six months from the date of retirement by 
approved route to home-based government servants serving in Pakistan Missions abroad 
and their families from the station of retirement to Pakistan.  
 
2.  
In the event of the legitimate children of the retiring government servants 
receiving education at the station of retirement, the T.A. for such children may be 
claimed within one year from the date of retirement. In either case no T.A. advance is to 
be paid, instead the Mission will itself arrange necessary tickets and charges for the 
transportation of personal effects in accordance with entitlement. 
 
3.  
This issues with the concurrence of the Ministry of Finance vide their 
U.O. Note No.668-R5/64, dated the 30th March, 1964. 
[Authority:- Foreign Affairs O.M. No. Rules 4/7/63, dated the 4th April, 1964]. 
 
3.2 
Revision of Traveling Allowance  
Rules (Within Pakistan) 
The existing rules governing the grant of traveling allowance to government 
servants on tour and on transfer, etc. within Pakistan were framed long ago and do not 
conform to the present day conditions, the President has, therefore, has pleased to decide 
as follows:— 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
TRAVELLING ALLOWANCE FOR JOURNEY ON RETIREMENT  
 
17.(a) A government servant shall be allowed TA to the extent specified below, 
in respect of the journey from the place of his last posting to his home 
town, performed during leave preparatory to retirement or on or after 
retirement.  
(i) 
Actual fare by rail or air of the class to which he was entitled 
immediately before his retirement for himself and for each member 
                                                          
 Amended vide Finance Division‘s O.M.No.F.1(5)R-10/2010-98 dated 24-04-2014. 

 CHAPTER-9                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                             Page - 911 
 
 
of his family. For journeys by road between places not connected by 
rail or *air, mileage allowance shall be allowed.  
(ii) 
Cost of transportation of personal effects to the extent admissible to 
him immediately before retirement for journeys on transfer.  
(b) 
Advance payment for expenditure as at (a) above shall be made and be 
treated as final payment. 
(c) 
The home town shall be determined according to entries pertaining to the 
permanent address of the government servant in his service record or 
according to the declaration, made by him for purposes of leave travel 
concession. 
(d) 
The term ―retirement‖ shall mean retirement on attaining the age of 
superannuation, or on completing prescribed service limit, or voluntary 
retirement on completion of 25 years qualifying service or on invalid 
pension or compulsory retirement.  
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
18. 
[omitted] 
     X 
     X 
     X 
     X 
 
19.  The existing rules and general orders on the subject shall be deemed to 
have been modified to the extent indicated in the preceding paragraphs.  
 
20.  These orders shall come into force from the 1st January, 1973.  
[Authority: Para 17 of Finance Division‘s OM  No. F. 2(1)-Rev., 1/72, dated 20-12-1972]. 
 
3.3 
T.A. for Journey on Retirement -  
Cost of Transportation of Personal  
Car/ Motorcycle/Scooter 
 
Reference paragraph 17 of this Division O.M. No. F. 2(1)-Rev.1/72, dated the 
20th December, 1972, as amended from time to time.  
 
2.   
It has been decided that, in addition to the cost of transportation of 
personal effects prescribed in paragraph 17 of the Office Memorandum referred to above, 
the cost of transportation of personal car or motor cycle or scooter shall also be 
admissible for journey to home town on retirement. The cost shall, however, be 
calculated by road and restricted to the distance by the practicable route.  
 
3.  
These orders shall have immediate effect.  
[Authority:- Finance Division‘s OM No. 2(3)-R. 9/79-dated 23rd January, 1979]. 
 

    Page - 912                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                 CHAPTER-9 
 
 
 
3.4 
T. A. for Journey on Retirement –  
Determination of Home Town 
According to paragraph 17 of Finance Division‘s Office Memorandum No. F. 
2(1)- Rev. 1/72, dated the 20th December, 1972, a civil servant is entitled to travelling 
allowance for journey on retirement up to his home town, on the scale and to the extent 
prescribed therein. The home town for this purpose is determined according to entries 
pertaining to the permanent address in his service record or according to the declaration 
made for purpose of leave travel concession.  
 
2.  
A question has arisen as to how the home town should be determined in 
cases where the civil servant had no occasion to make a declaration for the purpose of 
leave travel concession; nor was any entry pertaining to permanent address available in 
his service records or, where available, the service book/service record shows- a place of 
permanent residence in territories now forming part of India. It has been decided that the 
following procedure shall be adopted to regulate such cases:—  
(i) 
Civil servants who have already retired or are on leave preparatory to 
retirements.—They may be allowed to give declaration to this effect now 
and granted travelling allowance accordingly.  
(ii) 
Civil servants who are in service.—They may be required to declare their 
home town within a period of six months from the date of issue of these 
orders.  
[Authority:- Finance Division‘s O.M. No. F. 2 (42)-R. 9/75, dated the 24th November, 1975]. 
 
3.5 
Time-Limit for Availing of the  
Concession of Traveling Allowance  
After Retirement 
 
Reference paragraph 17 of Finance Division‘s Office Memorandum No. F. 2(l)-
Rev. 1/72, dated the 20th December, 1972, according to which a retiring civil servant is 
entitled to claim Travelling Allowance for journey, upto his home town, performed during 
leave preparatory to retirement or on or after retirement to the extent prescribed therein.  
 
2.  
It has now been decided that a civil servant who did not avail himself of 
the concession of retirement T.A. during leave preparatory to retirement, may do so 
within six months after the actual date of his retirement. If, however, a retired civil 
servant dies during this period, without having availed himself of the concession, it may be 
allowed to the family on application to the Head of Department and should be availed of 
before the expiry of six months from the date of retirement of the deceased government 
servant or within three months of the date of his death, whichever may be later.  
 
3.  
It has further been decided that in the case of retired civil servants who are 
re-employed immediately after, or within six months from the date of their retirement, the 
time limit prescribed in paragraph 2 above, shall commence from the date on which the 
period of re-employment concludes.  
[Authority:- Finance Division‘s O.M. No. F. 2 (5)-R. 9/76, dated the 3rd March, 1976]. 

 CHAPTER-9                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                             Page - 913 
 
 
3.6 
T. A. for Journey on Retirement – 
Admissibility of TA to Employees with  
Home Towns of Gilgit Baltistan and Chitral 
 
According to paragraph 17 of Finance  Division O.M. No. F.2(l) Rev. 1/72 dated 
the 20th December, 1972  a government servant, on retirement, is entitled to T.A. to the 
extent specified therein.  
 
2.  
A question has been raised as to what amount of T.A. shall be admissible 
to employees whose home towns are in *Gilgit, Baltistan, Chitral and therefore, of 
necessity, they have to perform the journey on retirement, by air. The matter has been 
considered and it has been decided that in such cases T.A. shall be allowed as under:—  
(i) 
For the portion of journey connected by rail, rail fare of the class of 
entitlement.  
(ii) 
For the portion of journey connected by road, mileage allowance at 
prescribed rate. 
(iii) 
Air fare (economy class) for self and family, from the airport of 
Rawalpindi/Peshawar, as the case may be, upto the airport near the home 
town;  
(iv) 
and cost of transportation of personal effects paisas 3 per road mile from 
the residence at the old station of posting to the residence at his home 
town, irrespective of mode by which the personal effects are carried. 
[Authority:- Finance Division‘s O.M. No. F. 2(16)-R. 9/77, dated the 29th July, 1977]. 
3.7 
Time Limit for Availing of the Concession  
of Traveling Allowance after Retirement –  
Admissibility in Re-employment in Government  
 
Reference Finance Division‘s Office Memorandum No. F. 2(5)-R9/76, dated the 
3rd  March 1976, on the subject noted above. A question has been raised as to whether the 
concession of retirement T.A in case of re-employment is also admissible to retired civil 
servants who are re-employed in autonomous/ semi-autonomous organizations or private 
companies. It is clarified that the concession of retirement T.A. in ‗case‘ of re-
employment is admissible only to those retired civil servants who get re-employment in 
government departments and not to those re-employed in autonomous/semi-autonomous 
organizations or private companies. It is also clarified that a retired civil servant is 
entitled to avail of the T.A. concession any time during leave preparatory to retirement or 
after his retirement but before the expiry of the time limit of six months after the date of 
retirement. In the case of re-employment during leave preparatory to retirement or within 
six months from the date of retirement, a retired civil servant can avail of the concession 
any time before the termination of his re-employment or within a period of six months 
from the date on which his re-employment period ends. 
[Authority:- Finance Division‘s O.M. No. F. 2 (28-R.9/80; dated the 10th March, 1981]. 
                                                          
Previously ―Northern Areas‖. 
As per Revised Rates amended from time to time.  

    Page - 914                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                 CHAPTER-9 
 
 
3.8 
Revision of Transfer Grant, Transportation  
of Motorcar/ Motorcycle/Scooter and  
Mileage Allowance 
 
Reference Finance Division's O.M. No. F.2(1)-Rev.I/72 dated the 20th December, 
1972, on the above mentioned subject, as amended from time to time. It is stated that the 
President has been pleased to decide that the existing rates of Transfer Grant, Transportation 
of Motor Car/Motorcycle/Scooter by road and the Mileage Allowance shall be revised with 
immediate effect, as under:— 
 
(I)  TRANSFER GRANT 
 
(i) 
Employees having family 
One month‘s pay. 
(ii) 
Employees not having a family 
Half month‘s pay. 
Note:—  
(i) Transfer TA is admissible where change of residence is involved in 
consequence of change of headquarters. 
 
(ii) Transfer grant is admissible only where breaking-up of the house hold 
establishment at the old station and setting up of the house hold 
establishment at new station takes place, and a certificate to this effect is 
recorded on the Transfer TA bill by the Government servant concerned 
duly countersigned by the controlling officer (No.F.2(34)-r.9/84-999/84, 
dated 30.09-1984). 
 
[Authority:- Finance Division‘s O.M. No.F.1(2)-Reg.10/2005, dated 10th September, 2005]. 
 
(II)  TRAVELLING AND MILEAGE ALLOWANCE 
 
Transportation 
Previous 
 
Existing 
(i) 
Motor Car 
Rs. 2/- k.m. 
Rs. 5/- per k.m. 
(ii) 
Motor Cycle/Scooter 
Rs. 1/- per k.m. 
Rs. 2.5/- k.m. 
Mileage Allowance 
 
 
(i)   Personal Car/Taxi 
Rs. 5/- per k.m. 
Rs. 10/- pr k.m. 
(ii)  Motor Cycle/Scooter 
Rs. 2/- per k.m. 
Rs. 4/- per k.m. 
(iii)Bicycle/Animal back/ foot 
Rs. 1/- per k.m. 
Rs. 2/- per k.m. 
(iv)  Public Transport 
Rs. 1/- per k.m. 
(BPS-6 and below). 
Rs. 1/- per k.m. 
BPS-7 and above). 
Rs. 2.5/- per k.m. 
 
Rs. 2.5/- per k.m. 
                                                          
 Revised vide Finance Division‘s O.M No. F.1(3)/Imp/2012 dated 16-07-2012. 

 CHAPTER-9                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                             Page - 915 
 
 
Travel by Air 
Govt. servants in BPS-17 
and those in receipt of pay 
of Rs. 54000 and above. 
Govt. servants in 
BPS-17 and above. 
Carriage of Personal effects on 
Transfer/ Retirement 
Rs. 0.008 per k.m. Per k.g. 
Rs. 0.02 per k.m. per 
k.g. 
(ii)   Government servants shall be allowed to use the mode of transport as shown 
below:— 
Mode of Transport 
Category of Government servants 
Personal car, borrowed car, hiring of 
a full taxi. 
Officer of Category I. In the case of others, a 
taxi may be engaged, if the urgency of the 
situation so demands, with the approval of the 
controlling officer. 
Personal Motor Cycle/Scooter. 
Category I and II. 
Bicycle etc. and public transport 
plying for hire single seat basis. 
All Government servants. 
 
[Ministry of Finance O.M. No. F. 2(1)-Imp. 1/77, dated the 29th April, 1977.] 
 
It has been decided to reimburse the toll tax on Motor Way paid by an officer 
while travelling in an official vehicle on official duty/tour on production of original 
receipt in token thereof. It has also been decided to allow reimbursement of the Toll Tax 
on Motor Way paid by an officer while travelling on official duty/tour by his own car 
subject to production of original receipt in token thereof. 
[Authority:—Finance Division‘s O.M. No. 1(5) R. 9/98-345, dated 13th March, 2002.] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
 Revised vide Finance Division‘s O.M No. F.1(3)/Imp/2012 dated 16-07-2012. 

    Page - 916                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                 CHAPTER-9 
 
 
II.   RE-EMPLOYMENT 
 
4.1 
Employment after Retirement- Policy and  
Procedure – Re-employment after Superannuation  
 
It has been noticed that Ministries/Divisions initiate proposals for re-employment of 
government servants after superannuation as a routine measure. It is emphasized that 
re-employment beyond superannuation should be an exception and not the rule. It may be 
recommended only in cases where government considers that the experience gained by the 
retiring person is of vital importance and can be gainfully utilized, particularly in fields 
where suitably qualified and experienced persons are not available. 
 
2.  
For achievement of the objective mentioned above, the government has 
framed a policy for re-employment of government servants and cases for re-employment 
would, in future, be considered in accordance with the following criteria: 
 
(i) 
non-availability of suitably qualified or experienced officers to replace the 
retiring officer; 
 
(ii) 
the officer is a highly competent person with distinction in his 
profession/field; 
   
(iii) the re-employment does not cause a promotion block; and 
 
(iv) retention of the retiring officer, for a specified period, is in the public interest. 
 
This policy would also apply to government controlled corporations and other 
autonomous bodies. 
 
3.  
Proposals for re-employment are required to be accompanied with the 
following documents/information:- 
 
(a) 
the proposal duly signed by Secretary or Additional Secretary Incharge of the 
Ministry concerned to be received in the Establishment Division 6 months 
before the officer is due to attain the age of superannuation and has the 
approval of the Minister Incharge; 
 
(b) 
the steps taken to train the substitute, if any; 
 
(c) 
PERs with photograph, ICP chart and bio-data on prescribed proforma; and 
 
(d) 
certificate that the officer is medically fit. 
 
4.  
Re-employment beyond the age of superannuation in all cases requires the 
approval of the Prime Minister. While submitting summaries for re-employment /extension 
in re-employment on the prescribed proforma, as circulated vide Establishment Secretary 
D.O letter No. 4/1/84-R-I dated 08-08-1985 as Annex. 
 
5.  
It is requested to instruct all concerned in Ministries/ Divisions and Attached 
Departments/autonomous bodies to strictly follow the guidelines given above. 
[Authority.- Establishment Secretary's D.O. letter No.7/3/ 89-OMG-II dated 28-01-1989]. 
 
 

 CHAPTER-9                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                             Page - 917 
 
 
(ANNEX) 
 
BIO-DATA FORM 
(TO BE USED IN RE-EMPLOYMENT CASES) 
1. 
(Name of the Officer) ……………….. 
 
a. 
Grade………… 
 
b. 
Date of Birth & Age on                 
 
    
(Years  
Months  
Days) 
 
 
………… 
………  
………… 
 
c.  
Date of joining & Length of Service   
 
    
(Years  
Months  
Days) 
 
 
………… 
………  
………… 
 
d.  
Date of Re-Employment (approved earlier) (Only  
 
 
…………in case of extension in Re-employment period). 
 
e.  
Total PERs   V.Good  Good  Average  Below   Average 
 
 
(Years to be shown against Average & Below Average PERs)  
 
 
……….. …….. 
…….. 
………     ………   …………. 
 
NOTE: 
 
 
(1) 
Any missing PERs with reasons 
 
 
(2) 
Photo of the officer affixed in the CR dossier or not, if not affixed. 
 
f.  
Adverse Remarks in the PERs 
 
g.  
Service (Showing Appointment Held) 
2. 
Promotion in Blockade 
 
(Indicate if Promotion blockade is created due 
to his re-employment). 
 
 
4.2 
Indication of Date of Superannuation of  
Officers Proposed for Appointment to  
Tenure Posts 
 
Cases have come to the notice in which some officers, who were about to attain 
the age of superannuation within a few months time, were recommended for appointment 
to tenure posts, and in the Summary for the Prime Minister, there was no indication that 
the tenure of the proposed appointment would last much beyond the age of 
superannuation of the recommendee. Submission of such proposals to the Prime Minister 
                                                          
 BPS/Post. 

    Page - 918                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                 CHAPTER-9 
 
 
without indication of date of birth amounts to disguised recommendation for re-
employment. The competent authority has viewed the aforesaid lapse with displeasure 
and has directed that all proposals entailing to appointment to tenure posts should, 
besides providing other relevant information, specifically mention the date of 
superannuation of the recommendee so that the competent authority may be able to 
exercise conscious discretion in regard to appointing a person to a tenure post involving 
his retention in public service beyond the date of his superannuation. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No.1/134/99-E.6, dated 3-9-1999]. 
 
4.3 
Re-employment of Civil Servants After Compulsory  
Retirement or Termination of Service 
 
A person, whose services have been terminated as a result of a disciplinary action 
against him, or retrenched due to winding up of an organization (where he was serving) 
on grounds of its having been set up irregularly, will not be re-employed without 
obtaining the orders of the President. 
 
2.  
Such cases for re-employment of persons, in all grades, both in 
government service and corporations etc., should be submitted by the Ministry concerned 
(together with its recommendations and bio-data of the proposed person), through the 
Establishment Division, to the *President for orders.  Such a proposal shall be made in 
the form of a ―Summary‖, containing the approval of the Minister-in-Charge, and signed 
by the Secretary or Additional Secretary Incharge. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 2/6/78-CV, dated 08-1-1979]. 
 
4.4 
Re-employment During Refused L.P.R 
 
A question has arisen whether a government servant, whose L.P.R. has been 
refused, should be recommended for re-employment on the same post, after 
superannuation. 
 
2.  
It   has been decided that as a matter of policy, re-employment, beyond 
superannuation, may not be initiated as the period of refused L.P.R. gives ample time to 
find out replacement of the retiring officer. In exceptional cases, where re-employment 
beyond superannuation is inevitable, the reasons therefor may specifically be brought out 
in the ―Summary for the *President‖. 
 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 3/60/81, dated 17-11-1982]. 
 
4.5 
Re-employment after Superannuation  
by Corporations/ Autonomous Bodies 
 
It has time and again been stressed that the approval of the President* would be 
necessary in all cases of re-employment after the age of superannuation in government as 
well as in the autonomous bodies. In this connection attention is invited to Establishment 
Secretary's D.O. letter No. 8/l/72-CV, dated 29-5-1972 and Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No. 2/2/ 
78- CV, dated 24-12-1978. According to these instructions the age of superannuation of 
all government servants should be 60 years and this should apply equally to government 
                                                          
 Prime Minister. 
 BPS. 

 CHAPTER-9                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                             Page - 919 
 
 
controlled corporations/ autonomous bodies etc. and if such organizations have 
prescribed age beyond 60 years they were required to amend their recruitment/service 
rules and inform the Establishment Division of compliance. It was abundantly made clear 
that in case no communication was received, it would be assumed that the age of 
superannuation, as prescribed in their rules, is 60 years. 
 
2.  
Contrary to the explicit instructions referred to above, it has come to 
notice that corporations/autonomous bodies have been re-employing persons after the 
date of superannuation without obtaining prior approval of the *President. 
 
3.  
It is, therefore, reiterated that no person who has already attained the age 
of 60 years should be allowed to be in employment without obtaining prior approval of 
the President. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 2/48/84-ABC dated 23-1-1985]. 
 
4.6 
Cabinet Decision Regarding  
Re-employment 
 
The Cabinet in its meeting held on 12-11-1990 has decided that no re-
employment beyond the age of superannuation should be allowed except in very 
exceptional cases for which approval of the Prime Minister would need to be obtained. 
 
2.  
This decision is also applicable to autonomous bodies/semi-autonomous 
bodies and may please be brought to their notice for strict compliance. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No.4/2/90-R.I dated 5-12-1990]. 
4.7 
Re-employment beyond  
Superannuation in Unavoidable  
Cases 
 
The Ministries/Divisions are advised not to initiate cases of re-employment of 
civil servants beyond the age of superannuation unless that is considered unavoidable due 
to non-availability of his replacement and the importance and sensitivity of the job which 
must be clearly brought out while initiating any such proposal. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No.4/1/93-R.I dated 27-8-1995]. 
 
5.1 
Continuation in Service Beyond Superannuation 
 
The Prime Minister has taken serious notice of cases in which civil servants 
were allowed to continue in service beyond the date on which they attained the age of 
superannuation or completed the specified period of their re-employment on contract 
simply on the grounds that proposals for their re-employment beyond the age of 60 or 
beyond the period of re-employment had been submitted or were being submitted. This 
practice is in violation of government's clear instructions issued time and again.  In this 
connection, attention is invited to circular (d.o. letter No. 4/1/84-R.I dated 20-6-1984). 
                                                          
 Prime Minister. 

    Page - 920                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                 CHAPTER-9 
 
 
 
2.  
The procedure for employment of civil servants after retirement should be 
strictly followed. It should particularly be ensured that all proposals for re-employment 
beyond the age of 60 or for extension of the period of current re-employment are made at 
least 6 months before the date of attaining the age of superannuation or the date of expiry of 
the current period of re-employment, as the case may be. 
 
3.  
In case a proposal for re-employment has been submitted and no decision has 
been received by the date on which the civil servant concerned attains the age of 60 or 
completes the current period of re-employment, it is the responsibility of the head of office to 
ensure that the civil servant relinquishes the charge on such date. 
[Authority.- Establishment Secretary's D.O. No. 4/1/84-R.I, dated 8-8-1985]. 
 
5.2 
Guard Against Unauthorised Overstayal  
after Superannuation/on Expiry of the  
Period of Contract Re-employment  
 
It has been observed by the Establishment Division in certain cases that officers 
on superannuation or on expiry of contract re-employment continue in office which is 
violation of the existing instructions issued on the subject from time to time. Attention is 
invited to this Division's D.O. letters No. 5/10/83-E-4, dated 23-4-1983, No.4/1/84-R.1, 
dated 20-11-1986, O.M.No.4/1/84-R.1, dated 2-9-1990 and O.M. No.4/2/90-R.1, dated 5-
12-1990. 
 
2.  
In view of the above, all the Ministries/Divisions are requested to ensure 
that the instructions already issued by the Establishment Division are complied with in 
letter and spirit and no officer is allowed to continue in office after superannuation/on 
expiry of the period of contract re-employment unless prior approval of the competent 
authority is obtained in advance. In case of unauthorized overstayal, the financial liability 
for such an irregularity shall rest upon the head of the department and the officer 
concerned himself. 
 
3.  
If it is intended to get the retiring person re-employed on contract in public 
interest or to get his contract extended, a proposal in the form of a summary for the Prime 
Minister should be submitted to Establishment Division about six months in advance 
from the date of his retirement from service/expiry of the contract so that Establishment 
Division could have sufficient time to process it properly. 
 
4.  
The proposal for re-employment on contract/extension in contract should 
invariably contain the following information:- 
 
(a) 
A brief report on the performance of the officer during the period of his 
contract re-employment (only for the cases for extension in contract). 
 
(b) 
Certificate that the proposed re-employment/ extension in contract will not 
create promotion blockade for the departmental officers. 
 
(c) 
Steps taken to train a substitute of the officer and a statement of 
circumstances in which no officer could be groomed to take up the 
assignment. 

 CHAPTER-9                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                             Page - 921 
 
 
 
5.  
No request for grant of ex-post-facto approval to the contract re-
employment/ extension in contract, in any circumstances, will be entertained. 
 
6.  
All the Ministries/Divisions are requested to strictly abide by the above 
guidelines. If a proposal, floated on the subject, either fails to give adequate information, 
as mentioned above or is not received in the Establishment Division in time, the same 
will be liable to be summarily rejected by the Establishment Division and will not be 
processed further. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No.3/16/99-CP-6, dated 26-5-1999]. 
 
5.3 
Request for Re-employment by  
 
Officers Retired Voluntarily  
 
As per existing policy of the government, re-employment of retired civil 
servants beyond superannuation is not encouraged except in cases when a civil servant 
possesses such expertise that his services are irreplaceable. 
 
2.  
The Prime Minister has been pleased to decide that requests for re-
employment of ex-civil servants, who have voluntarily retired from service, shall be 
summarily rejected. Ministries/Divisions are advised not to initiate any such proposal in 
future. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No.4/1/96-R.I, dated 16-11-1996]. 
 
5.4 
Permission to Seek Private Employment  
by Civil Servants During LPR and Within  
Two Years of Retirement  
 
 A revised proforma, required to be filled in by civil servants who may be 
desirous of seeking private employment, during LPR or within two years of the date of 
the retirement, in accordance with section 14 of the Civil Servants Act, 1973 is enclosed 
(Annex). 
 
2. 
All Ministries/Divisions are requested to circulate the above instructions 
and ensure that these are observed by their employees. 
[Authority: Estab. Div.‘s OM No. 8/1/83/D4/D3, dated 17th July, 2002] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

    Page - 922                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                 CHAPTER-9 
 
 
(Annex) 
 
APPLICATION FORM FOR SEEKING PRIVATE 
EMPLOYMENT DURING LPR/WITHIN TWO YEARS OF RETIREMENT 
 
1. 
Name: ………………………….. 
 
2. 
Appointments held during last 5 years of service: 
 
Post(s) held 
with BPS 
Department(s)/Organization(s) 
Total Period of 
Stay 
From 
To 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. 
Nature of Retirement ():………………………….. 
4. 
Date of Proceeding on LPR: ………………………….. 
5. 
Date of Retirement: ………………………….. 
6. 
Particulars of Private Employee: ………………………….. 
(i) 
Name of organization 
: ………………………….. 
(ii) 
Law under which registered: ………………………….. 
(iii) Composition of the Board of Directors: …………………… 
(iv) Nature of business etc: ………………………….. 
(v) 
Location of Head Office: ………………………….. 
7. 
Designation of the Post and Pay Offered: ………………………….. 
8. 
Nature of duties: ………………………….. 
9. 
Whether the firm had official dealings with any of the department in which the 
officer served during the last five years. If so please give details: 
10. 
Any other information 
           Signature 
with Designation/BPS 
   of last post held and  
                                                                                                              Organization 
(i) 
On attaining the age of superannuation. 
(ii) 
Voluntary retirement on completion of 25 years service, 
(iii) Premature retirement, under Section 13(1)(i) of Civil Servants Act, 1973. 
(iv) Compulsory retirement on account of disciplinary action. 
(v) 
Retirement on medical grounds. 
 
(Additional sheet(s) may be added where necessary) 
 
                                                          
Pl. indicate one of the following: 
(a) 
Voluntary retirement on completion of 25 years service. 
(b) Retirement on attaining the age of superannuation (60 Years). 
 10 (iii) to read with 3. 

 CHAPTER-9                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                             Page - 923 
 
 
5.5 
Permissions Granted by the Provincial  
Governments to Officers of All Pakistan  
Services/Federal Government Officers  
 
The Chief Secretaries of Provincial Governments are allowed to grant 
permission to the officers belonging to All Pakistan Services who are, for the time being, 
serving in the Provinces under the Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964. 
 
2. 
These officers apply for any permission later during their posting in the 
Federal Government and usually refer to the previous permission(s) obtained by them 
during their posting in the provinces. As the Establishment Division generally have no 
intimation/record of such permission(s), it becomes difficult for Establishment Division 
to deal with such cases in their time perspective. 
3. 
To help keep the record complete and up to date in the Establishment 
Division, it is requested that; 
(i) 
Copy of each request of Federal Government servant and order passed 
thereon by Chief Secretary may be sent to Establishment Division. 
(ii) 
Similar information in regard to cases processed during calendar 
year 2000 onwards may be sent. 
[Authority: Estab. Div.‘s OM No. 1/3/99.D.3, dated 8th October, 2002] 
 
6.1 
Ex-Government Servants (Employment with Foreign   
 
 
 
Governments) (Prohibition) Act, 1966 (Act No. XII of 1966) 
 
An Act to prohibit ex-Government servants from seeking or taking up 
employment with a Foreign Government or Foreign Agency. 
 
WHEREAS, in the interest of the security of Pakistan, it is expedient to prohibit 
Ex-Government Servants from seeking or taking up employment with a Foreign 
Government or Foreign Agency; 
 
AND WHEREAS the national interest in relation to the security of Pakistan 
requires Central legislation in the matter under clause(2) of Article 131 of the 
Constitution; 
 
It is hereby enacted as follows:- 
 
1.   
Short title, extent and commencement.– (1) This Act may be called the 
Ex-Government Servants (Employment with Foreign Governments) (Prohibition) Act, 
1966. 
 
(2)  It extends to the whole of Pakistan. 
 
(3)  It shall come into force at once. 
 
2.  
Definitions.– In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject 
or context,– 
                                                          
 Article 241, Constitution of Pakistan, 1973 provides for continuance in force of laws, rules and orders 
consistent with the provisions of the Constitution, 1973. 

    Page - 924                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                 CHAPTER-9 
 
 
 
(a) 
―ex-Government servant‖ means any person who was, at any time, appointed 
or employed as an officer or servant of the *Central Government or a 
Provincial Government and has ceased to be so appointed or employed; 
 
(b) 
―foreign agency‖ means any office or establishment of the diplomatic or 
consular representative of a foreign Government by whatever name called 
and includes any information, public relations, trade or commercial agency, 
service, centre or foundation established or maintained by any such 
Government or by any person who is a national of a foreign country; and 
 
(c) 
―foreign Government‖ means the Government of a foreign country. 
 
3.  
Prohibition of employment, etc.– (1) No ex-Government servant shall, except 
with the previous permission in writing of the Federal Government or a person [or 
authority authorized by it in this behalf] seek or take up employment as an officer or servant 
of a foreign government or a foreign agency. 
 
(2)   No ex-Government servant who is, at the commencement of this Act, in the 
service of a foreign government or a foreign agency shall, except with the permission in 
writing of the *Central Government, continue in such service after the expiry of three 
months from such commencement. 
 
[4.  Penalty.– Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 3 shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine 
which may extend to fifty thousand rupees or with forfeiture of property, or with any two or 
more of the said punishments]. 
[Authority.- The Act Published in the Gazette of Pakistan Extraordinary Part-I, dated 7-7-1966]. 
 
6.2 
Ex-Government Servants  
Employed by UN Agencies 
 
Ex-Government servants employed by U.N. or its agencies are not affected by the 
Ex-Government Servants (Employment with Foreign Governments) (Prohibition) Act, 1966 
(Act No. XII of 1966).  
[Authority.- Para 3 of Ministry of Foreign Affairs Circular No. SS (A) EGS/66, dated 17-12-1966]. 
6.3 
Production of Certificate of Physical  
Fitness by Retired Government Servants  
on Re-employment to Gazetted Posts 
 
Under S.R.4-A (6), retired government servants re-employed   immediately after 
retirement are exempted from producing medical certificate of health. It has, however, 
been noticed that the appointing authorities do not insist upon the production of a medical 
certificate even where there has been a break between the retirement and re-employment 
of the government servants. The attention of the Ministries/Divisions is drawn to the 
provisions of the said rules and it is stated that the medical certificate of health should be 
                                                          
* Now Federal. 
 Section 3, as amended vide Ordinance No. XXIX of 1984, dated 27-6-1984. 
 Subs. vide Ordinance No. XI of 1982, dated 18-5-1982. 

 CHAPTER-9                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                             Page - 925 
 
 
obtained in all cases in which an interval occurs between government servant's retirement 
and re-employment. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 5/5/49-Ests. (SE), dated 23-8-1949]. 
 
6.4 
Re-employment and Medical Examination 
 
The orders contained in the Ministry of Finance Office Memorandum No. 20-F. 
38(I) RI/(2)/54, dated the 17th August, 1954 (Annex) also apply to the cases of 
re-employment to Gazetted posts when an interval occurs between the retirement and 
re-employment of a government servant. A medical certificate of health is necessary in such 
cases under the orders contained in the Establishment Division Office Memorandum No. 
5/5/49- Ests. (SE), dated the 23rd August, 1949. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No.15/28/ 54-SEII, dated 4-5-1955]. 
(ANNEX) 
[Copy of Finance Division O.M. No. 20-F. 38(I) RI/(2)/54, dated the 17th August, 1954]. 
 
The question has been raised whether candidates appointed direct to Gazetted posts 
under Central Government should be examined by a Medical Board or by a Civil Surgeon. 
Since those orders are not clear on some points the question has been reconsidered and it has 
been decided that – 
  
 (ii) Persons already in temporary service under Federal Government whether in 
Gazetted or non-Gazetted posts will also be subject, mutatis mutandis, to the 
general rules in (i) above; provided that any person appointed to a post not 
likely to last for more than a year who has already been medically examined 
by an authority not lower than a Civil Surgeon in respect of a previous post 
need not undergo examination again until and unless the period of the post is 
extended beyond one year.  If such a person has already been examined by a 
Medical Board in respect of his previous appointment and if standard of 
medical examination prescribed for the new post is the same, then he need 
not be required to undergo a fresh medical examination before confirmation. 
 
(iii) A person, who is already permanent or quasi-permanent in a post under the 
Federal Government, need not be medically examined on appointment to a 
Gazetted post; provided that if the new appointment is not in normal line of 
promotion of the person concerned  and requires a different medical standard 
from that required in his permanent or quasi-permanent appointment or the 
rules for recruitment to the new appointment prescribe a fresh medical 
examination in respect of all candidates, he shall undergo a fresh medical 
examination by the prescribed standard and by the prescribed medical 
authority. 
 
2.  
These orders will not have retrospective effect and cases already decided 
need not be re-opened. 
                                                          
 Federal 

    Page - 926                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                 CHAPTER-9 
 
 
 
3.  
These orders do not apply to the medical examination of persons recruited 
through competitive examinations held by the Federal Public Service Commission, the rules 
for which make separate provision for the purpose. 
 
Note:— The above orders also apply to female candidates appointed to Gazetted posts 
vide Establishment Division letter No. 1/15/58-SEI, dated 27-5-1958, reproduced 
at Serial No. 5 of Part IV of the Ministry of Finance's Compilation of General 
Orders (2nd Edition). 
6.5 
Fixation of Pay and Allowances of  
Re-employed Government Servants –  
Principles for Fixation of Pay 
 
The question of formulating a uniform policy in regard to the fixation of pay of 
retired government servants re-employed under the Government of Pakistan and in 
autonomous bodies had been under the consideration of the Ministry of Finance for some 
time past. The President has now been pleased to decide that, in supersession of all previous 
orders on the above subject, the pay of retired government servant on re-employment shall 
be fixed in accordance with the following principles:- 
 
(i) 
Where the new post carries a fixed pay, he should be allowed the pay of that 
post less pension. 
 
(ii) 
Where the new post carries a time-scale of pay:- 
 
(a) 
If the substantive pay last drawn by the officer before retirement was 
less than the minimum of the scale of the new post, he should be 
allowed the minimum of the scale less pension. 
 
(b) 
If the substantive pay last drawn was more than the minimum of the 
scale but less than the maximum of the scale of the new post, his pay 
should be fixed at the stage in the scale corresponding to the pay last 
drawn, or if there be no such stage, at the next lower stage in the scale.  
From the pay so fixed the amount of pension should be deducted. 
 
(c) 
Where the substantive pay last drawn was more than the maximum of 
the scale of the new post the pay should be fixed at the maximum less 
pension. 
  
(iii) A re-employed government servant should earn increments in all cases where 
pay has been fixed in a scale at a stage lower than the maximum. 
 
(iv) In case a re-employed pensioner is promoted to a higher post, his pay should 
be fixed in such a manner as if he was a serving officer with the difference 
that from the pay so determined the pension would be deducted. 
 
(v) 
In a case where officiating pay higher than the substantive pay was drawn for 
a continuous period of 3 years or more immediately before retirement, the 
officiating pay drawn before retirement may be treated as substantive pay for 
the purpose of these orders. 

 CHAPTER-9                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                             Page - 927 
 
 
 
2.  
The above principles should be made applicable to employment in 
autonomous bodies and public limited companies in which government holds controlling 
shares. 
 
3.  
These principles should be followed in case of appointments to statutory 
posts as those of Governors, Speakers, Ministers etc.  A retired official appointed to any 
statutory post should draw the pay of the post less the amount of pension drawn by him.  
 
4.  
The pay of the retired military personnel, re-employed in civil posts, may 
also be fixed in accordance with the above principles. In their case substantive pay shall also 
include 
the 
following 
elements; 
provided 
that 
they 
were 
drawn 
before 
retirement/release/leave/leave pending retirement for a continuous period of 3 years or 
more:— 
 
(a) 
Command/Staff/Charge Pay. 
 
(b) 
Instructional pay. 
 
(c) 
Qualification pay. 
 
(d) 
Disturbance Pay. 
 
5.  
The word ‗pension' wherever used in these orders means pension before 
commutation and/or surrender. 
 
6.  
These orders will have effect from the date of issue of this Office 
Memorandum. 
[Authority.- Finance Division‘s O.M. No.F. 4(7)-Regs.7/72, dated 1-1-1973]. 
 
6.6 
Grant of Allowances During Re-employment/ 
Contractual Appointment 
 
The queries have been received from different quarters about the payment of 
Orderly Allowance, Senior Post Allowance and Qualification Allowance (where admissible) 
during re-employment/contractual appointment. It is clarified that these allowances are not 
admissible during re-employment/contractual appointment because:— 
 
(1) 
100% Orderly Allowance is already included in pension, as Special 
Additional Pension. 
 
(2) 
Similarly, Senior Post Allowance also forms part of pension. Moveover, this 
allowance is admissible to civil servants: whereas a contractual appointee is 
not a civil servant. 
 
(3) 
Qualification Pay also forms part of pension. This has been examined many 
times in the past. The view has been: 
  
 
―QP is not admissible because, the philosophy at the time of its introduction 
was to encourage the government officers in service to do the higher courses 
and was made a condition for future promotion. It was meant as an incentive 
for government's regular, permanent officers who are in service. Moreover, 
the Qualification Pay is counted towards pension. As such, there cannot be 
two benefits at the same time, as the officer was already drawing.‖ 

    Page - 928                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                 CHAPTER-9 
 
 
 
2.  
If these allowances are again granted on re-employment, it will amount to 
duplication. This policy is being kept in mind while vetting the terms and conditions of 
contractual appointments and the payment of the above discussed allowances is not allowed 
to retired government servants. 
[Authority.- Finance Division‘s O.M. No. 5(4)R-3/96 dated 16-4-1996]. 
6.7 
Fixation of Pay of Retired Government Servants Civil/Military 
Re-employed under the Government and in Autonomous Bodies 
 
The question of fixation of pay of retired government servants, civil and military, 
on re-employment in civil posts under Federal Government and in autonomous bodies has 
been reviewed by government and the President has been pleased to decide that 
re-employment and re-employment pay of retired government servants shall henceforth be 
regulated in accordance with the following principles:- 
 
(I)  
Post on which re-employment shall be made 
 
 
(i) 
Re-employment of retired civil servants shall be made in grades 
equivalent to substantive *grade or temporary *grade if held for one 
year by the government servant before retirement. 
 
 
(ii) 
In the case of officers of armed forces, re-employment shall be made 
on contract in accordance with the instructions contained in the 
Establishment Division O.M. No. 14/5/78-D. III, dated 10-2-1980 in 
the case of civil posts and in the light of orders issued in pursuance of 
the Establishment Division No.14/5/78-D.III, dated 11-2-1980 in the 
case of autonomous bodies. The equivalent grade in the civil post shall 
be determined according to the equivalence formula approved by the 
President. 
 
(II)  Pay on re-employment under clause (I) above. 
 
 
(i)  
(a) 
When a retired civil servant is re-employed under Federal 
Government after superannuation or after completion of 30 
years pensionable service, his initial pay shall be fixed at the 
minimum of the pay scale of the post in which he is re-
employed. 
 
 
 
(b) 
When a retired civil servant is re-employed under the 
government owned/controlled autonomous/ semi-autono-mous 
bodies and corporations after superannuation or after 
completion of 30 years pensionable service, the initial pay of 
such a government servant shall be fixed at the minimum of 
the scale of pay of the post in which he is re-employed. 
 
 
 
(c) 
A re-employed government servant would earn increments under 
normal rules. 
 
 
 
(d) 
In addition to pay, as indicated in clause (a) and (b), full pension 
shall be admissible to the re-employed civil servant. 
                                                          
 BPS. 

 CHAPTER-9                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                             Page - 929 
 
 
 
 
(ii)  (a) 
When a retired military officer of the rank of Major/ equivalent 
and above is re-employed under Federal Government or under 
an autonomous body in accordance with clause I (ii), his pay 
may be fixed at the minimum of the equivalent grade in which 
re-employment is made and, in addition, full service pension as 
admissible under the rules shall be paid.  The pay scale of the 
post shall for this purpose be determined with reference to the 
equivalence formula mentioned in Clause I (ii). 
 
 
(iii) The pay of retired government servants other than those covered by I 
& II shall be fixed in accordance with the Ministry of Finance O. M. 
No. F. 4(7) Reg. 7/72, dated 1-1-1973 referred to above, as amended 
from time to time. 
 
2.  
Existing re-employed retired civil servants may opt to be governed by the 
existing rules/orders or by the revised orders in this Office Memorandum. Where such a 
government servant opts to be governed by the revised orders, his initial pay should be 
re-fixed at the minimum of the scale of the post held by him with effect from the 1st of the 
month in which option is given and pension may be allowed in addition as provided in part 
(II) (i) above. 
 
3.  
Existing retired officers of the armed forces of the rank of Major/equivalent 
and above who were re-employed in civil posts for a specified period may opt either to be 
governed by their existing terms and conditions or by the revised orders in this Office 
Memorandum.  Where such re-employed officers opt to be governed by the revised orders, 
they will be brought on the revised terms and conditions with effect from 23rd December, 
1979 on which date the President was pleased to approve the scheme published vide 
Establishment Division O.M. No.14/5/78-D. III, dated 10-2-1980.  From that date, their 
re-employment would be converted into re-employment on contract on the terms and 
conditions laid down in the O.M. of 10-2-1980 for the remaining term of their re-
employment or for a period of 3 years, whichever is less. Their pay will be re-fixed at the 
minimum of the scale of the post held by them w.e.f 23-12-1979, and if the pay so fixed plus 
pension is less than the pay received by them immediately before 23-12-1979, the difference 
shall be allowed as personal pay to be absorbed in future increase of pay. 
 
4.  
The option will be submitted to the Audit Officer concerned under advice to 
the Ministries/Divisions, Departments or offices administratively concerned. 
[Authority.- Finance Division‘s O.M. No.F.4(4)-Reg.7/78 dated 20-3-1980]. 
6.8 
Principle of Equivalence – Defence  
Services and National Pay Scales 
 
The President has been pleased to approve the following `principle of equivalence' 
between the rank held in the Defence Services with appointment in National Pay Scales. 
Defence Service Rank 
 
Major General  
 
 
Grade-21 or 22 at the  
 
                                                          
 Basic Pay Scales. 

    Page - 930                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                 CHAPTER-9 
 
 
 
and equivalent 
 
 
discretion of the Government. 
 
Brigadier and  
 
 
Grade-20. 
 
equivalent. 
 
 
 
Colonel and  
 
 
*Grade-19 
  
 
Lt. Colonel (with  
 
18 to 20 years  
 
commissioned  
 
service) and  
 
equivalent. 
 
 
Major and  
 
 
*Grade-18 
 
equivalent. 
 
 
Captain and  
 
 
*Grade-17 
 
equivalent and  
 
Lt. 2/Lt. and  
 
equivalent. 
 
[Authority.- Estt. Division's Circular No. 16/4/79-AV, dated 8-8-1979]. 
 
7.1 
Re-employment – Pay Fixation 
 
Reference sub-clauses (i) (b) and (ii) (a) of clause II of para 1 of this Division's 
O.M. No. F. 4(4) Reg. 7/78, dated 20th March, 1980 laying down the method of fixation 
of pay of retired civil and military officers on appointment to posts in government 
owned/controlled autonomous and semi- autonomous bodies. The position has been 
further reviewed with particular reference to re-employment against a post in an 
autonomous/semi-autonomous body or corporation included in Management *Grades 
vide Finance Division O. M. No. F. 6(27) Imp. I/79, dated 30th April, 1980, and 
appointment to which is, by law, required to be made and the salary of which is required 
to be fixed, by the Federal Government. It is clarified that in the case of such 
re-employment, the re-employed officer, civil or military, shall be entitled to draw 
minimum of the rank/*grade from which he has retired. In addition, he will be entitled to 
pension and pre-requisites attached to the management post concerned. 
[Authority.- Finance Division‘s O.M.No.F.4(4)-Reg.7/78-1520, dated 30-11-1980]. 
7.2 
Re-fixation of Pay After Introduction of  
Revised National Pay Scales  
 
Under the existing orders, the pay of a retired government servant who has been 
re-employed under the Federal Government or in an autonomous body or public limited 
company in which government holds controlling shares and who has not attained the age 
of 60 years, is required to be fixed after taking into account the amount of gross pension, 
                                                                                                                                                
 For Grade, read ‗BPS‘. 
 For Grade, read ‗BPS‘. 

 CHAPTER-9                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                             Page - 931 
 
 
i.e. pension before commutation and/or surrender. Consequent upon the liberalisation of 
pension rules for civil servants vide Finance Division O.M. No. F. 6(l)-Rev. 1/75, dated 
7-1-1977 the amount of gross pension in the case of existing pensioners is also required 
to be enhanced with effect from 1-2-1977 in accordance with the provisions of paras 3 
and 8 of the above mentioned O.M., with resultant adjustment in the pay. 
 
2.  
It has been decided that, consequent upon the introduction of Revised 
National Scales of Pay, the pay of retired government servants re-employed since before 
1-5-1977 who have been drawing, or may elect to draw, pay in, or with reference to the 
National Scales of Pay shall, with effect from 1st May, 1977, be fixed in the relevant 
revised National Scales of Pay in the manner indicated below:- 
 
(i) 
In the case of a re-employed government servant who has not attained the 
age of 60 years on 1-5-1977, the initial pay in the relevant Revised 
National Scale of Pay shall be fixed at the stage equal to, or if there is no 
such stage, at the stage next above, the amount arrived at by allowing an 
increase of 10% over the aggregate of the basic pay, which for this 
purpose shall be taken as inclusive of gross pension, i.e. pension before 
commutation and/or surrender, and the  dearness  allowances that would 
have been admissible thereon, but for these orders, on the 1st May, 1977. 
The pay so re-fixed shall then be reduced by the amount of gross pension 
and the amount of pension will continue to be drawn separately in addition 
to the pay so determined, subject to the condition that pay plus pension 
shall be limited to the maximum of the Revised National Scale of pay or 
the last pre-retirement substantive pay inclusive of dearness allowances, 
whichever is more. 
 
(ii) 
In the case of a re-employed government servant who has already crossed 
the age of 60 years before 1-5-1977 and is thereby entitled to draw 
pension in addition to pay of the post vide this Division O.M. 
No.F.4(3)-R.7/76, dated 17-2-1976 (Annex), the initial pay in the relevant 
Revised National Scale of Pay will be fixed as in (i) above on the basis of 
the pay he is entitled to draw in accordance with the above mentioned 
O.M., together with the dearness allowances subject to the pay so fixed 
not exceeding the maximum of the Revised National Scale of Pay. The 
amount of pension shall not figure in the calculation anywhere and shall in 
his case continue to be drawn separately in addition to the pay so fixed. 
 
3.  
When the pay of an existing re-employed government servant is fixed in 
the revised National Scale of Pay, the amount of Dearness Allowance, Special Dearness 
Allowance and Additional Dearness Allowance shall cease to be admissible with effect 
from 1st May, 1977. 
 
4.  
In the case of a retired government servant employed on or after 1-5-1977, 
the initial pay shall be fixed in the revised National Scale of Pay in accordance with the 
relevant orders for the time being in force, provided that the last pre-retirement pay in his 
case would be taken as inclusive of the amount of Dearness Allowance, Special Dearness 
                                                          
 Subs. vide Finance Division‘s O.M.No.F.1(4)Imp/77 dated 30-7-1977. 

    Page - 932                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                 CHAPTER-9 
 
 
Allowance and Additional Dearness Allowance, actually drawn or which would have 
been drawn, on the date of retirement. 
 
5.  
For the purpose of grant of allowances, the pay or basic pay on which the 
allowances are to be calculated would, in addition to actual pay drawn, also include the 
amount of gross pension which had been taken into account for the purpose of 
determination of pay during the period of re-employment. 
[Authority.- Finance Division‘s O.M. No. F. 1(4)-Imp.11/77, dated 14-5-1977]. 
 (ANNEX) 
[Copy of Finance Division O.M. No. F. 4(3)-R. 7/76, dated the 17th February, 1976]. 
SUBJECT:- 
Fixation of Pay, of Retired Civil Servants Re-employed in the 
Government of Pakistan and in Autonomous Bodies. 
 
A reference is invited to the Finance Division's O. M. No. F. 4 (7)Reg. 7/72, 
dated the 1st January, 1973  read with O.M. No. F. 4(6)-Reg. 7/73, dated the 22nd 
August, 1974 and it is stated that according to the instructions issued therein, the salary of 
a re-employed pensioner, as determined with reference to the scale of pay of the post to 
which he is appointed, is to be reduced by the amount of his gross pension. The position 
has been further reviewed and it has been decided that, in partial modification of the 
instructions referred to above, a retired civil servant who is re-employed after, or 
continues to be re-employed beyond, the age of 60 years, he may, with effect from the 
date of his appointment or of attaining the age of 60 years, as the case may be, allowed to 
draw his pension in addition to the pay of the post. 
 
2.  
The above decision will be applicable to retired government servants 
appointed to posts, other than statutory posts, under government or in autonomous bodies 
and public limited companies in which government hold controlling shares. 
 
3.  
The pay of the existing re-employed pensioners of the above categories 
shall be re-fixed in accordance with these orders with effect from the date of issue of this 
Office Memorandum. 
 
7.3 
Leave Salary Admissible  
During Re-Employment 
 
The government servants who proceed on leave preparatory to retirement on 
voluntary premature retirement on proportionate pension on completing 25 years of 
qualifying service and re-employed during LPR under the Central or a Provincial 
Government or in an autonomous or semi-autonomous corporation or body set up by or 
under the control of the *Central or Provincial Government or in a local body or Local 
Fund, will be entitled to leave salary, which shall be restricted to the amount of 
anticipated pension in accordance with Government decision below F.R. 69. 
[Authority.- Finance Division‘s O.M. No. F.2(59)-R.I/79, dated 22-7-1979, read with O.M. No. F. 
2(59)-R.I/79, dated 5-7-1980]. 
 
 
                                                          
 Federal.  

 CHAPTER-9                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                             Page - 933 
 
 
PART-II 
TERMINATION OF SERVICE  
AND  
DIRECTORY RETIREMENT  
I.   TERMINATION OF SERVICES 
 
8.1 
C.S.R. 436. Notice of Discharge on the  
Abolition of Post to Permanent Employees 
 
Reasonable notice should be given to an officer in permanent employ before his 
services are dispensed with on the abolition of his office. If, in any case, notice of at least 
three months is not given, and the officer has not been provided with other employment 
on the date on which his services are dispensed with, then, with the sanction of the 
authority competent to dispense with the officer's services, a gratuity not exceeding his 
emoluments for the period by which the notice actually given to him falls short of three 
months, may be paid to him, in addition to the pension to which he may be entitled under 
these regulations; but the pension shall not be payable for the period in respect of which 
he receives a gratuity in lieu of notice. 
 
1. 
The gratuity prescribed in this Article is not granted as compensation for 
loss of employment but only in lieu of notice of discharge with a view to mitigating the 
hardship caused an officer by the sudden loss of employment.  When, therefore, an 
officer discharged without notice is provided with some other employment on the date on 
which his services are dispensed with whether that re-employment be in qualifying or 
non-qualifying service, he is not entitled to any gratuity. 
 
2. 
Unless it contains an express statement to the contrary, an order for the 
abolition of an office or appointment shall not be brought into operation till the expiry of 
three months after notice has been given to the officers whose services are to be 
dispensed with on such abolition.  The immediate head of the office or the department 
will be held responsible that there is no necessary delay in giving such notice.  In the case 
of an officer on leave, the order shall not be brought into operation until the leave expires. 
 
Note.—‖Emoluments‖ in this rule means the emoluments or leave allowances 
(or partly the one, partly the other) which the officer would be receiving during the period 
in question had the notice not been given to him. 
 
CSR 436-A.  Whenever it is found necessary to determine the service of an 
officer serving under a contract within the period of his agreement, a specific intimation 
of the determination of the agreement and of the grounds on which it has been 
determined shall be furnished to the officer in writing. 
 
                                                          
 Added vide Finance Division‘s Notification No. D.203-RSII/69, dated 24-02-1969. 

    Page - 934                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                 CHAPTER-9 
 
 
 
8.2 
Termination of Service of Temporary  
Government Servants  
 
A civil servant is not necessarily in temporary employment merely because of a 
statement in the order of appointment that his appointment will be purely temporary and 
liable to termination at any time without any notice or reasons being assigned.  No civil 
servant is a temporary employee as long as the employment is for an indefinite period or 
against a post which continues to exist for an indefinite period.  It is extremely difficult to 
attribute to the legislature an intention to clothe the authorities concerned with arbitrary 
powers of terminating the services of a civil servant in their discretion without assigning 
any reason.  The courts have always been reluctant to interpret these provisions in a 
manner as would justify the externment of an employee without any justification. 
 
2. 
Further, after the enactment of Civil Servants Act, 1973, the services of a 
civil servant can either be terminated under Section 11 of the Act or under Government 
Servants (E&D) Rules, 1973.  It is not possible to spell out any power to terminate the 
services of an employee without notice and without assigning any reason from the provision 
of sub section (3) of Section 11 of Civil Servants Act, 1973, especially in the presence of the 
provisions of sub-section (1) thereof regarding termination of service during the initial or 
extended period of probation.  If an employee has passed through the period of probation to 
the satisfaction of the competent authority, he is no longer a temporary employee within the 
meanings of sub-section (3) if his employment is for an indefinite period or against a post 
which continues to exist for an indefinite period. 
 
3. 
In the light of the above advice of the Justice Division services of an employee 
can no more be terminated without notice and without assigning reason. 
[Authority.- Extract from Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 31/64-86-R-3 dated 20-4-1987]. 
 
8.3 
Termination of Services of Officers  
Employed on Contract   
 
It has been decided by the government that officers employed on contract 
normally be given 3 months' notice clause in the contract. 
  
2. 
All concerned are, therefore, requested to keep in view the above decision 
when appointing an officer on contract and to stipulate in the agreement that the services 
of the officer employed on contract may be terminated on 3 month's notice on either side 
even before expiry of the period of the contract. 
[Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No. 13/2/66-D.I. dated 27-6-1966]. 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
 Now Civil Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 2020. 

 CHAPTER-9                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                             Page - 935 
 
 
II.   REVERSION 
 
9.1 
Reversion to Lower Grade/Post 
 
Fundamental Rule 29.-If a Government servant is, on account of misconduct or 
inefficiency, reduced to a lower BPS or post, or to a lower stage in his time-scale, the 
authority ordering such reduction shall state the period for which it shall be effective and 
whether, on restoration, it shall operate to postpone future increments and if so, to what 
extent. 
 
Auditor General's Decision.-Having regard to the principle underlying 
Fundamental Rule 29, the question as to whether an increment falling due during the 
period of reduction should or should not be allowed is one necessarily to be decided with 
reference to the exact terms of the orders of the punishing authority. If the Audit Officer 
feels any doubt about the intention underlying the orders of the punishing authority, he 
has simply to ascertain it and act accordingly. 
[Authority.- Auditor General's letter U.O. No. 917/308-42, dated 19-12-1942]. 
 
9.2 
Imposition of Penalty for Specific Period 
 
It has been noted that the Government Servants (E&D) Rules do not require an 
authority to specify the period for which any penalty mentioned in Rule 4 (1) shall be 
effective, although according to Fundamental Rule 29 it is imperative for him to do so.  
To resolve this apparent discrepancy between the two rules, it is decided that in imposing 
a penalty under Rule 4 (1) of **Government Servants (E&D) Rules care should be taken 
to see that such an imposition is for a specified period and it should be stated whether, on 
restoration, it shall operate to postpone future increments and, if so, to what extent in 
order to make it in conformity with Fundamental Rule 29. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 2/3/65-DI, dated 7-8-1965]. 
 
9.3 
Reversion to Parent Group/Cadre 
 
Instances have come to the notice of the Establishment Division where officers 
inducted into the Secretariat Group have asked for reversion to their original Group. This 
defeats the purpose of horizontal movement which was envisaged under the 
Administrative Reforms to ensure a fair representation of officers with varied experience 
at policy making levels in the Federal Government. It has, therefore, been decided that 
officers ‗inducted into an Occupational Group with their consent, will not in future be 
allowed to opt out. 
 
2. 
However, officers of the Secretariat Group can be posted to other groups 
for exigencies of service and in public interest. 
[Authority.— Estt. Division‘s O.M. No.7(3)76-AV, dated 4-6-1980]. 
 
9.4 
Reversion of Ad-Hoc Appointees  
 
Ad hoc appointees cannot be promoted to higher grade vide Estt. Division O.M. 
No. 3/29/70-D. III, dated the 7th January, 1971. The question of determination of the 
                                                          
 BPS. 
 Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules,2020.  

    Page - 936                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                 CHAPTER-9 
 
 
seniority of the ad hoc appointees for purposes of promotion, therefore, does not arise.  
However, sometimes the question which does arise is as to which one of the several ad 
hoc appointees should be reverted when the F.P.S.C. qualified candidates become 
available. It has been decided that reversion should be made in the reverse order of ad 
hoc appointments.  However, when the date of ad hoc appointment of more than one 
officer is one and the same, the reversion should be made in the reverse order of the 
seniority in the lower BPS if available, otherwise the younger in age should revert first.  
Reversion, for the purposes of this O.M., includes termination of service where the ad 
hoc appointee was recruited directly from outside. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No.1/8/72-DIII, dated 4-5-1972]. 
 
9.5 
Departmental Promotion Committee not  
Concerned with Demotions/ Reversions 
 
It appears from references made recently to the Establishment Division that the 
scope and functions of Departmental Promotion Committees are not clearly understood.  In 
certain cases, government servants officiating without any condition in higher grades have 
been demoted on the recommendation of Departmental Promotion Committees.  It is 
necessary, therefore, that the position should be clarified. 
 
2. 
As their name indicates, the function of Departmental Promotion Committee 
is to make recommendations in respect of promotions and there is nothing in Establishment 
Division Office Memorandum No. 33/l/47-Ests. (SEII), dated the 29th January, 1948 which 
relates to the constitution of these Committees to suggest that these Committees have been 
given the power to recommend the demotion of an officiating officer (Please see Note below). 
 
3. 
What Departmental Promotion Committees should do is to prepare a list 
of officers whom they consider fit for promotion.  They should revise this list 
periodically which means that they can either add to, or subtract from it. An officer who 
has been substantively promoted to a higher BPS will not, of course, figure in this list.  
Similarly, an officer who has been promoted to officiate in a substantive vacancy for an 
indefinite period should not appear in the list because he is for all practical purposes to 
continue in the higher BPS. In other words, the officers whose names will be shown in 
the list maintained by these Committees will be those who have not been promoted to a 
higher BPS in any capacity or who have officiated off and on or who are officiating 
against leave vacancies or in temporary posts of short duration and are, therefore, liable 
to revert in the normal course to the lower grade. 
[Authority.- Cabinet Secretariat, Estt. Branch O.M. No.F.33/49-SE, dated 18-6-1949]. 
Note below:— 
 
Para No. 2 of Sl.No. 2.6 requires to be read with Appointment, Promotion & 
Transfer) Rules,1973 and Civil Servants Promotion (BPS-18 to BPS-21) Rules,2019 
regarding constitution and powers of DPC/CSB.  
 
                                                          
Rule 2(d) of the Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973 framed under the Civil 
Servants Act, 1973 contains the definition of the term "Departmental Promotion Committee‖. 

 CHAPTER-9                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                             Page - 937 
 
 
III. RESIGNATION FROM GOVERNMENT SERVICE 
 
10.1  Acceptance of Resignation During  
 
 
Pendency of Disciplinary Proceedings  
 
The instructions contained in the Establishment Division Office Memorandum No. 
5/3-A/52-ME, dated the 6th January, 1953 (Annex) can be interpreted to mean that the 
resignation of a government servant, whose conduct is under enquiry, can be accepted and 
the orders of dismissal or discharge can be passed in due course. The legal position, 
however, is that any orders of dismissal or discharge passed after retirement or resignation 
will be void, and inoperative on the ground that the person concerned does not remain in 
service as soon as his resignation has been accepted. The instructions contained in the 
Office Memorandum, dated the 6th January, 1953 (Annex) have, therefore, been considered 
further by the Establishment Division in consultation with the Ministry of Law and the 
following clarification is issued for the guidance of the Ministries, etc:- 
(a) 
Service of a temporary government servant who has signed the undertaking 
can be terminated by the government on 14 days' notice. 
(b) 
If such a government servant wants to terminate his employment, he 
should submit his resignation. 
(c) 
The employer may or may not accept his resignation. 
(d) 
If his resignation is not accepted on any ground, including the ground of 
disciplinary action outstanding against him, he continues to be in service 
inspite of his having given 14 days' notice of his intention to do so. 
(e)  He should not absent himself from office without leave. 
(f) 
If his resignation is accepted, he does not continue his service, and his 
presence in office should not be insisted upon. 
(g) 
In the event of his resignation having been accepted the disciplinary action 
standing against him, should not be proceeded with as he cannot be 
punished for the reason that he does not continue in service. 
(h) 
The undertaking prescribed for temporary employees does not reserve any 
right in a temporary government servant to terminate his employment by 
mere notice.  He has to resign his post on the expiry of the notice and the 
resignation does not become effective unless it is accepted by 
Government. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 1/34/57-ME, dated 12-11-1957 read with O.M. 
No.1/3/57-ME, dated 9-5-1958]. 
(ANNEX) 
 
[Copy of Establishment Division O.M. No. 5/3-A/52-ME, dated the 6th 
January, 1953]. 
 
A question arose whether temporary employees who have signed the prescribed 
undertaking should be allowed to resign if disciplinary proceedings are pending against 
them. It has been decided, in consultation with the Ministry of Law, that if such a 

    Page - 938                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                 CHAPTER-9 
 
 
government servant gives the prescribed notice of his intention to resign or forfeit his pay 
to the President in lieu thereof, his continuance in service should not be insisted upon.  
The person concerned should, therefore, be relieved of his duties but the departmental 
proceedings against him may be continued if considered necessary and formal orders 
passed. 
 
10.2 Withdrawal of Resignation by  
Government Servants  
 
The question whether resignation once tendered by a government servant before 
completion of 25 years qualifying service may be allowed to be withdrawn before or after 
its acceptance by the competent authority has been under consideration in the 
Establishment Division. 
 
2. 
The following decisions have been taken in consultation with the Ministry 
of Finance:- 
(i) 
Withdrawal of resignation before acceptance.-In case a government 
servant withdraws resignation before it is accepted by the competent 
authority, the resignation should be deemed to have been withdrawn. 
(ii) 
Withdrawal of resignation after its acceptance but before it becomes effective 
(i.e. before the government servant concerned is relieved).—It should be open 
to the authority accepting the resignation to allow the government servant 
concerned to withdraw the resignation on the merits of the case. 
 [Authority.- Estt. Div.‘s O.M. No. 8/13/69-F.I, dated 30-1-1970 read with Estt. Division‘s 
O.M.No.6/9/79-D.I., dated 19-6-1979] 
 
10.3 Proposal for Resignation and Original  
Letter of Resignation 
 
It has been observed that proposals for acceptance of resignation of officers of 
BPS-17 and above received in the Establishment Division for submission to the 
competent authority* are not accompanied by the original letter of resignation sent by the 
officer concerned. This requires a reference back to the Ministries/Divisions for obtaining 
the letter of resignation. All Ministries/Divisions are, therefore, requested to please 
ensure that the letter of resignation of the officer in original invariably forwarded 
alongwith the Summary for acceptance by the competent authority. 
 
2. 
Besides, the Summary should contain information on the following points:- 
(i) 
Whether any dues are recoverable from the officer. 
(ii) 
Whether any disciplinary proceedings are pending or are contemplated 
against him. 
                                                          
*With the delegation of powers of appointment to Secretaries of Ministries/Divisions/Head of Department 
except those Groups/Service administratively controlled by the Establishment Division in respect of civil 
servants in BPS 17 & 19, the position has changed. In respect of the resignation of the officers in BPS 17 to 19 
borne on the Cadres/Groups/Service controlled by the Establishment Division and all the officers in BPS 20 and 
above, the orders are to be followed. 

 CHAPTER-9                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                             Page - 939 
 
 
(iii) Whether the officer concerned is required to serve the Government for any 
specified period in accordance with the terms and conditions of his 
appointment. If so, whether that period has expired.  If it has not expired, 
whether any money spent on his training etc, are recoverable in 
accordance with any rule or bond executed by him. 
 
 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No.1/11/80-D.I., dated 13-2-1980]. 
 
10.4 Resignation of Temporary  
Government Servants  
 
Sub-section (3) of section 11 of the Civil Servants Act, 1973 makes the services 
of a civil servant subject to the provision of sub-section (2) liable to termination on 
fourteen days' notice or pay in lieu thereof.  Cases have come to the notice of the 
Establishment Division in which a civil servant, who intends to resign from service, gives 
14 days' notice or deposits 14 days' pay in lieu thereof. After expiry of the notice period 
or having deposited 14 days' pay in lieu thereof, and he absents himself from office 
without waiting for acceptance of his resignation. This is against the rules. There is no 
provision in the Civil Servants Act, 1973, whereunder a civil servant whether permanent 
or temporary who wants to terminate his employment is required to give or can give 14 
days' notice or forfeit his pay to government in lieu thereof. 
 
2.  
A civil servant, permanent or temporary, who wishes to terminate his 
appointment, should, submit his resignation in writing. The resignation shall not become 
effective unless it is accepted by the competent authority. Till such time the resignation is 
accepted, the civil servant concerned continues to be in service and cannot absent himself 
from his duties without proper leave. The position in this regard is already explained in the 
Establishment Division's O.M. No. 1/34/57-MS, dated the 12th November, 1957, read with 
O.M. of even number dated the 9th May, 1958. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.6/3/81-RI(DI), dated 26-7-1981]. 
 
10.5 Proposals for Resignation to be Self-Contained 
 
Attention is invited to the Establishment Division's O.M. No.1/11/80-D.I, dated 
the 13th February, 1980. It is stated that inspite of instructions contained therein, the 
Ministries/Divisions have been sending proposals for acceptance of resignation of 
officers to the Establishment Division which are not self-contained. The proposals are 
neither sent in the form of a Summary nor are accompanied by the original letter of 
resignation of the officer. A number of such references also do not give the information 
as required in para 2 of the aforesaid O.M. This requires back reference to the 
Ministry/Division concerned causing delay in the disposal of the case.  The Ministries/ 
Divisions are, therefore, requested to submit, in future, the cases of resignation strictly in 
accordance with the instructions contained in the Establishment Division's O.M. quoted 
above and may also keep in view the orders contained in O.M. No. 6/3/81-R.I, dated the 
13th February, 1982. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 15/11/84-R.2, dated 28-5-1984]. 
 
 

    Page - 940                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                 CHAPTER-9 
 
 
 
10.6 Procedure for Processing of Cases  
of Resignation of Officers 
 
The Ministries/Divisions have been sending proposals for acceptance of resignation 
of officers to the Establishment Division after the officers have been relieved of their duties. 
In most of the cases, it has come to the notice of Establishment Division that government 
servants usually tender resignation from government service on 14 days‘ notice or forfeit pay 
in lieu thereof and absent themselves from duties without waiting for the acceptance of their 
resignations by the competent authority. If a person has submitted resignation from service he 
continues to be in service, inspite of his having given 14 days notice, till his resignation is 
accepted by the competent authority. If he absents himself from duty he is liable to be 
proceeded against under the Efficiency and Discipline Rules, 1973 which may also result in 
dismissal from government service. 
 
2. 
Ministries/Divisions are, therefore, requested to forward the cases for 
acceptance of resignation to the Establishment Division well in time and should not 
relieve the resigning officer from his duties till his resignation from service is accepted by 
the competent authority. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 15/6/85-R.2 dated 3-3-1986]. 
 
10.7 Absence from Duty Without Leave  
 
Cases have come to notice where government servants have applied for leave, 
but before the leave was sanctioned, have absented themselves from duty and left their 
station without permission, while government dues were payable by them on various 
accounts.  In some cases, government servants have proceeded on short leave, and 
subsequently applied for extension of leave, which was not granted, whereupon they have 
resigned their appointments without clearing the government dues outstanding against 
them.  Such behaviour on the part of government servants is not only undesirable but also 
contravenes the provisions of the Pakistan Essential Service (Maintenance) Act, 1952, 
which makes all employment under government an essential service.  If any government 
servant, without reasonable excuse, abandons his employment or absents himself from 
work, he is liable to conviction to be punished with imprisonment and fine vide section 5 
and 7 of the Act. 
 
2. 
It is, therefore, requested that the attention of all government servants may 
kindly be drawn to the provisions of the Act and they may be warned that any 
contravention of the Act renders them liable to prosecution.  A number of prosecutions 
have already been instituted in the court and others are in contemplation. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 11/1/60 E.V., dated 22-10-1960]. 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
 Now Civil Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 2020. 

 CHAPTER-9                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                             Page - 941 
 
 
IV. DIRECTORY RETIREMENT 
Sl.No.11  
 
[Civil Servants (Directory Retirement from Service) Rules,2020 
 
S.R.O. 320 (I)/2020.— In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of 
Section 25 of the Civil Servants Act,1973 (LXXI of 1973) read with Notification No. S.R.O. 
120(I)/98 dated the 27th February,1998, the Prime Minister is pleased to make the following 
rules, namely:—  
1. 
Short title and commencement.— (1) These rules shall be called the Civil 
Servants (Directory Retirement from Service) Rules, 2020. 
(2) 
These rules shall come into force at once.  
2. 
Definitions.—(1) 
In these rules, unless there is anything repugnant in the 
subject or context,— 
(a) 
―Act‖ means the Civil Servants Act,1973 (LXXI of 1973); 
(b) 
―competent authority‖ means the appointing authority in terms of Rule 
 
6 of the Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules,1973; 
(c) 
―conduct unbecoming‖ means the conduct on the part of a civil servant that is 
contrary to public interests or which harms his standing or the standing of the 
civil service in the eyes of the public or is contrary to any prescribed 
law/rules/procedures/instructions and includes inefficiency on his part 
necessitating his directory retirement under these rules; 
 (d) ―directory retirement‖ means retirement under clause (i) of sub-section (1) of 
 
section 13 of the Act read with sub-section (2) thereof; 
(e) 
―retirement board‖ means a Board constituted under these rules for review of 
cases for the purpose of directory retirement in respect of civil servants in 
BPS-20 and above; and 
(f) 
―retirement committee‖ means a committee constituted under these rules for 
review of cases for the purpose of directory retirement in respect of civil 
servants in BPS-19 and below. 
 
(2) 
All other words and expressions used but not defined in these rules shall, 
unless the context otherwise requires, have the same meanings as assigned thereto in the Act 
and rules made thereunder.  
 
3. 
Composition of retirement board.— There shall be a retirement board to 
recommend to the competent authority directory retirement from service in respect of civil 
servants in BPS-20 and above and shall consist of— 
(a) 
Chairman, Federal Public Service Commission 
Chairperson 
(b) 
Secretary, Cabinet Division 
Member 
(c) 
Secretary, Establishment Division 
Member 
                                                          
Civil Servants (Directory Retirement from Service) Rules, 2020 has been repealed from ab-initio vide 
Notification S.R.O No. 698(I)/2022 dated 30-05-2022.  

    Page - 942                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                 CHAPTER-9 
 
 
(d) 
Secretary, Finance Division 
Member 
(e) 
Secretary, Law and Justice Division 
Member 
(f) 
Secretary or head of the Division concerned, service 
group or cadre administrator 
Member 
(g) 
Additional Secretary-II, Establishment Division 
Secretary 
  
 
4. 
Composition of retirement committee.—(1) There shall be various 
retirement committees in each Division or Department or office to recommend to the 
competent authority directory retirement from service in respect of civil servants in BPS-19 
and below.  
 
(2) 
The retirement committee for civil servants in BPS-17 to 19 shall consist of— 
 
 
(a) 
Additional Secretary or in his absence Senior Joint 
Secretary or Joint Secretary of the Division concerned 
Chairperson 
(b) 
Representative of Establishment Division not below BPS-
20 
Member 
(c) 
Representative of Finance Division not below    BPS-20 
Member 
(d) 
Representative of Law and Justice Division not below 
BPS-20 
Member 
(e) 
Head of the Department or office concerned, other than a 
Division [or his nominee not below BPS-20] 
Member 
(f) 
Deputy Secretary of the Division concerned  
Secretary 
 
(3) 
The retirement committee for civil servants in BPS-16 and below shall consist 
of — 
(a) 
Senior Joint Secretary or Joint Secretary of the Division 
concerned 
Chairperson 
(b) 
Representative of Establishment Division not below BPS-
19 
Member 
(c) 
Representative of Finance Division not below    BPS-19 
Member 
(d) 
Representative of Law and Justice Division not Below 
BPS-19 
Member 
(e) 
Head of the Department or office concerned, other than a 
Division *[or his nominee not below BPS-19] 
Member 
(f) 
Deputy Secretary of the Division concerned  
Secretary 
                                                          
Inserted & added vide Establishment Division‘s S.R.O No. 1264(I)/2020 dated 23-11-2020. 

 CHAPTER-9                            ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                             Page - 943 
 
 
 
 [4. The Retirement Committees of Department or Organization or office not 
related to any Ministry/Division, and having post with different nomenclature as mentioned 
in Sub-Rule (2) and (3) above shall consist of member(s) of equivalent rank(s) approved, on 
case to case basis, by the Establishment Division.]  
 
5. 
Grounds for retirement.— (1)  No civil servant shall be recommended for 
directory retirement under these rules, unless any one or more of the following conditions 
is/are fulfilled in his/her case— 
 
(a) 
has earned average performance evaluation reports (PERs) or adverse 
remarks have been recorded in three or more PERs from three different 
officers, for a period not less than six months and have attained-finality after 
appeal thereagainst if any; 
 
(b) 
has been twice recommended for supersession by the Central Selection Board 
(CSB), Departmental Selection Board (DSB) or Departmental Promotion 
Committee (DPC), as the case may be, or twice not recommended for 
promotion by the High Powered Selection Board and such recommendations 
have been approved by the appointing authority and the matter has attained 
finality; 
 
(c) 
has been found guilty of corruption or has entered into plea bargain or 
voluntary return with National Accountability Bureau or any other 
investigating agency; 
  
(d) 
has been on more than one occasion placed in category ‗C‘ by the CSB, DSB 
or, as the case may be, DPC under the Civil Servants Promotion (BPS-18 to 
BPS-21) Rules, 2019; or 
 
 
(e) has conduct unbecoming.  
 
6. 
Procedure for directory retirement.—(1) Each Division, Department or 
office shall maintain a list of civil servants who have completed service specified in clause 
(i) of sub-section (1) of section 13 of the Act alongwith complete service record.  
 
(2) 
A review of the performance of all civil servants by the respective retirement 
board and retirement committees shall be conducted upon completion of service specified in 
sub-rule (1). 
 
(3) 
Subsequent to the mandatory review upon completion of service under sub-
rule (1) and prior to retirement at the age of superannuation or exercising the option of 
premature retirement, cases of civil servants shall be referred by the Secretary or Cadre 
Administrator concerned to the relevant retirement board or retirement committees, as the 
case may be, if it is determined that grounds for directory retirement as specified in rule 5 
have become applicable.  
 
(4) 
While referring cases to the retirement board or retirement committees either 
for mandatory review after service specified in sub-rule (1) or any subsequent review the 
Secretary or Cadre Administrator concerned shall ensure provision of relevant record, 
                                                          
 Inserted vide Establishment Division‘s S.R.O No. 1264(I)/2020 dated 23-11-2020. 

    Page - 944                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                 CHAPTER-9 
 
 
including complete facts, supporting documentary evidence, if any, duly authenticated 
service record, as well as such other record as may be considered relevant.  
 
(5) 
The retirement board or retirement committees shall examine the referred 
cases and may recommend to the competent authority, giving specific reasons, directory 
retirement of a civil servant. 
 
(6) 
If the competent authority, after examining the recommendations of the 
retirement board or retirement committees and other record placed before it, agrees with the 
recommendations for directory retirement of a civil servant, he shall issue a show cause 
notice to the civil servant concerned informing him of the grounds on which it is proposed to 
make the direction for directory retirement and shall provide him the opportunity of personal 
hearing if so requested by the civil servant concerned: 
Provided that in cases where [the President or] the Prime Minister is the competent 
authority, he may designate *[BS-22 officer(s) to issue show cause notice and also 
designated BS-22 officer(s) to grant] personal hearing to the civil servant(s) on his behalf.     
 
(7) 
On receipt of reply of the civil servant and after giving him the opportunity of 
personal hearing, if any, where the competent authority is satisfied that further retention in 
service of the civil servant is not in the public interest, the competent authority shall pass 
order for directory retirement. 
 
7. 
Retiring pension.— A civil servant against whom an order for directory 
retirement is passed by the competent authority shall be eligible for pension or other 
retirement benefits as the competent authority may, in public interest, directs. 
 
8. 
Right of appeal or review.— A civil servant against whom an order for 
directory retirement is passed by the competent authority shall have the right of appeal or, as 
the case may be, review in accordance with the Civil Servants (Appeal) Rules, 1977.] 
[Authority:— Establishment Division‘s S.R.O No. 320(I)/2020 dated 15th April,2020] 
________________ 
                                                          
 Ins. & Subs. vide Establishment Division‘s Notification S.R.O No. 89(I)/2022 dated 10-01-2022. 

CHAPTER 10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPEALS, PETITIONS AND 
REPRESENTATIONS 
(945 – 946) 
 
 

CHAPTER-10                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                        Page -947 
 
 
CHAPTER 10 
 
APPEALS, PETITIONS AND REPRESENTATIONS 
 
Sl. 
No(s). 
Chapter Contents 
Page  
No(s). 
 
I. 
Appeals, Petitions and Representations 
 
 
1.1 
Civil Servants (Appeal) Rules, 1977 ...................................................... 949-952 
` 
1.2 
Guidelines for Submission of Appeals/Representations to the Chief 
Executive/President .................................................................................
952-953 
 
1.3 
Forwarding of Advance Copies of the Appeals/ Representations/ 
Petitions etc. ............................................................................................
953 
 
2.1 
Bar Against Making Joint Representations .............................................
954 
 
2.2 
Appeals/Petitions/Representations by the Civil Servants Addressed to 
the Prime Minister ...................................................................................
954 
 
2.3 
Withholding of Appeals Under the Civil Servants (Appeal) Rules, 
1977 ........................................................................................................
954-955 
3 
Consideration of Cases of Government Servants Who Have Filed Civil  
Suits  ......................................................................................................................
955 
 
II. SERVICE TRIBUNALS 
 
4 
The Service Tribunals Act, 1973 (Act No. LXX of 1973) .............................. 956-960 
 
5.1 
The Service Tribunals (Procedure) Rules, 1974 ................................. 960-967 
 
5.2 
Placement of Members in MP-I Scale .....................................................
968 
 
5.3 
Placement of Retired Judicial Officers in MP-I Scale .............................
968 
 
5.4 
Permanent Seat of the Service Tribunal ..................................................
968 
 
6.1 
Defence of Cases in the Tribunal and Law Courts .............................. 968-970 
 
6.2 
Letter of Attorney General of Pakistan Regarding Implementation of 
Orders of the Federal Service Tribunal and High Courts Appealed 
Against in Supreme Court of Pakistan .....................................................
970 
 
6.3 
Letter of Chairman FST Making Suggestions to Reduce Pending 
Litigation .......................................................................................................
971 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
 
 

Page -948                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-10                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                        Page -949 
 
 
CHAPTER 10 
APPEALS, PETITIONS AND REPRESENTATIONS 
I. 
Appeals, Petitions and Representations 
 
1.1 
Civil Servants (Appeal) Rules, 1977 
 
In exercise of the powers conferred by section 25 of the Civil Servants Act, 1973 
(LXXI of 1973), the President is pleased to make the following rules, namely:– 
 
1.  
(1)  These rules may be called the Civil Servants (Appeal) Rules, 1977. 
 
 
(2) They shall come into force at once. 
 
2.  
In these rules unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,– 
 
 
*[(a) Appellate authority means.– 
(1) 
in cases relating to discipline.– 
(i) 
where the order is made by the [authorised officer], the 
officer designated as authority under the Government 
Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 1973. 
(ii) 
@[where the order is made by the officer, designated as 
authority under the rules specified in paragraph (1), the 
officer or authority next above the authority; and]. 
(iii) where the order is made by the Prime Minister, the 
President; and 
(2) 
in other cases, the officer or authority next above the authority 
against whose order the appeal is preferred and where the 
order is made by the Prime Minister, the President; and] 
 
 
(b) 
*[  ] 
 
 
(c) 
―penalty‖ means a penalty provided for in the ***Government 
Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 1973. 
 
3.  
Every civil servant shall be entitled to appeal, to the appellate authority 
from an order passed by an authority **[or an authorized officer] imposing upon him any 
penalty: 
                         
* Subs. and omitted vide Establishment Division Notification S.R.O.No.178(1)/99, dated 24-3-1999. 
The role of authorized officer has not been incorporated in Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) 
 
Rules,2020, therefore, it may be presumed as Authority in the meaning of Rule 2 (c) Civil Servants 
 
(Efficiency & Discipline) Rules,2020.      
Now Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules,2020. 
 
Note:— Since Government Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules,1973 have been repealed vide Rule 21 
 
of Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules,2020. Therefore, the reference Government Servants 
 
(Efficiency & Discipline) Rules,1973 wherever occurs, it may be construed as Civil Servants (Efficiency & 
 
Discipline) Rules,2020.    
@ Subs. vide Establishment Division Notification SRO No.335(I)/2000, dated 14-6-2000. 

Page -950                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-10 
 
 
 
Provided that, where the penalty is imposed by an order of the President, the 
civil servant shall have no right to appeal but he may apply for review of the order. 
 
4. 
(1) A civil servant shall be entitled to appeal to the appellate authority 
from an order passed by an authority which– 
 
(a) 
alters to his disadvantage, his conditions of service, pay, allowances or 
pension; or 
 
(b) 
interprets to his disadvantage the provisions of any rules whereby his 
conditions of service, pay, allowances or pension are regulated; or 
 
(c) 
reduces or withholds the maximum pension, including an additional 
pension, admissible to him under the rules governing pensions; or 
 
(d) 
terminates his employment or gives notice of such termination otherwise 
than– 
(i) 
on his reaching the age of superannuation, or 
(ii) 
in accordance with the provisions of the Civil Servants Act, 1973 
(LXXI of 1973): 
 
Provided that a person appointed by the President shall have 
no right to appeal from an order passed by the President, but he may 
apply for review of the order: 
 
Provided further that no appeal or review shall lie on matters 
relating to the determination of fitness of a person to hold a 
particular post or to be promoted to a higher post or *grade. 
 
(2) 
A member of an **All-Pakistan Unified Grades serving under a Provincial 
Government may appeal, from the order of the Provincial Government, to the President. 
 
(3) 
A civil servant appointed by the President may appeal to the President 
from an order passed by an authority subordinate to the President. 
 
5.  
(1) Every person preferring an appeal should do so separately and in his 
own name. 
 
(2)  Every appeal preferred under these rules shall contain all material statements 
and arguments relied upon by the appellant, shall contain no disrespectful or improper 
language, and shall be complete in itself. 
 
(3)  Every appeal shall be submitted through the Head of the office to which 
the appellant belongs or belonged, and through the authority from whose order the appeal 
is preferred. 
 
(4)  Every appeal shall be submitted within a period of thirty days of the 
                         
* BPS. 
**All Pakistan Services (Change in Nomenclature)Rules,1973, notified vide SRO 1307(I)/73 dated  14-09-
1973, have been repealed vide SRO 89(I)/2014 dated 14-02-2014, whereby all notifications and instructions 
issued on the subject from time to time were mutatis mutandis amended. 

CHAPTER-10                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                        Page -951 
 
 
communication of the order appealed against. 
 
6.  
(1) In the case of an appeal under rule 3, the appellate authority shall 
consider– 
 
(a) 
Whether the facts on which the order appealed against was based have 
been established; 
 
(b) 
Whether the facts established afford sufficient ground for taking action; 
and 
 
(c) 
Whether the penalty is excessive adequate, or inadequate, and, after such 
consideration shall confirm, set aside or modify the previous order, *[and 
the appellant shall be informed of the reasons for passing such order]. 
 
(2) 
In the case of an appeal under rule 4, the appellate authority shall pass 
such order as, having regard to all circumstances of the case, appears to it just and 
equitable. *[and the appellant shall be informed of the reasons for passing such order]. 
 
(3) 
The authority from whose order an appeal is preferred under these rules 
shall give effect to any order made by the appellate authority. 
 
7.  
(1) An appeal may be withheld by an authority not lower than the authority 
from whose order it is preferred if:– 
 
(a) 
it is an appeal in a case in which no appeal lies under these rules; or 
 
(b) 
it does not comply with the provisions of sub-rule (1), (2) or (3) of the  
rule 5; or 
 
(c) 
it is not preferred within the time specified in sub-rule (4) of rule 5 and no 
reasonable cause is shown for the delay; or 
 
(d) 
it is addressed to an authority to which no appeal lies under these rules; or 
 
**[(e) 
it is a repetition of a previous appeal and is made to the  same  appellate  
authority by which such appeal has been decided, and no new facts or 
circumstances are adduced which afford grounds for a reconsideration of 
the case]: 
 
Provided that in every case in which an appeal is withheld, the appellant shall be 
informed of the fact and the reasons for it: 
 
Provided further that an appeal withheld on account only of failure to comply 
with the provisions of sub-rule (2) or (3) of rule 5 or clause (d) may be resubmitted within 
one month of the date on which the appellant is informed of the withholding of the appeal 
and, if resubmitted in a form which complies with those provisions or is addressed to the 
proper appellate authority, as the case may be, shall not be withheld. 
 
(2) 
No appeal shall lie against the withholding of an appeal by an authority 
competent to do so. 
                         
* Added vide Establishment Division Notification S.R.O. No.582 (1)/93, dated 26-6-1993. 
** Added vide Establishment Division Notification No. 5/1/81-R.I., dated 26-12-1981. 

Page -952                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-10 
 
 
 
8. 
(1) Every appeal which is not withheld under these rules shall be 
forwarded to the appellate authority with an expression of opinion by the authority from 
whose order the appeal is preferred. 
 
(2) 
Every appeal by a civil servant serving under a Provincial Government or 
a local authority, which is not withheld under these rules shall be forwarded by the 
Provincial Government or the local authority to the Federal Government with an 
expression of its opinion. 
 
(3) 
A list of appeals withheld under rule 7, with reasons for withholding them, 
shall be forwarded quarterly by the withholding authority to the appellate authority. 
 
(4) 
An appellate authority may call for any appeal admissible under these rules 
which has been withheld by a subordinate authority and may pass such orders thereon as 
it considers fit. 
 
9.  
(1) Nothing in these rules shall operate to deprive any person of any right 
of appeal which he would have had if these rules had not been made, in respect of any 
order passed before they came into force. 
 
(2) 
All appeals pending immediately before the coming into force of these 
rules shall be deemed to be appealed under these rules. 
 
10.  The Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1930, are 
hereby repealed, but the repeal thereof shall not affect any action taken or anything done 
thereunder. 
[Authority.–Establishment Division‘s Notification S.R.O. No. 54(I)/77, dated 17-1-1977]. 
1.2 
Guidelines for Submission of  Appeals/ 
Representations to the Chief Executive/President 
 
It has been observed that Ministries/Divisions/Departments generally do not 
forward to the Establishment Division complete/comprehensive references on the appeals 
/representations filed by the aggrieved civil servants before the Chief Executive/ 
President, for orders in the capacity of the appellate authority. It results in back-
referencing and inordinate delay in processing/finalization of such cases. 
 
2. 
In order to facilitate objective analysis and speedy disposal, the appeals/ 
representations preferred by the civil servants under the Civil Servants (Appeal) Rules, 1977, or 
section 9 of the Removal from Service (Special Powers) Ordinance, 2000, as the case may 
                         
 Now Prime Minister. 
 Add/Substitute ‗Prime Minister‘, as the case may be. 
Removal from Service (Special Powers) Ordinance,2000 has been repealed vide Establishment Division‘s 
 
O.M. No.3/10/2010-R.II dated 17-03-2010.  

CHAPTER-10                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                        Page -953 
 
 
be, should invariably be submitted in the form of self contained Summary supported by copies 
of the following essential documents as annexures:– 
(i) 
charge sheet; 
(ii) 
reply of the accused to the charge sheet; 
(iii) inquiry report; 
(iv) Show Cause Notice; 
(v) 
reply of the accused to the Show Cause Notice; 
(vi) recommendations/order of the [‗Authorized Officer‘ or] the ‗Authority‘, 
as the case may be, regarding the imposition of penalty upon the accused; 
(vii) notification of the penalty; 
(viii) appeal/representation (in original) alongwith its enclosures; and 
(ix) detailed parawise comments of the Ministry / Division / Department 
concerned on the appeal/representation, in juxtaposition as per prescribed 
format, annexed herewith. 
 
2. 
All Ministries/Divisions/Departments and Provincial Governments are 
requested to bring these guidelines to the notice of all concerned for guidance/ compliance. 
[Authority.–Establishment Division‘s O.M.No.5/4/94/Rev/D.3 dated 19-9-2001]. 
(Annex)  
(Prescribed Format) 
PARAWISE COMMENTS ON THE APPEAL SUBMITTED 
BY…………………………………..……….   
  (NAME, DESIGNATION, OFFICE, BPS), AGAINST MINOR/MAJOR PENALTY 
OF …………………………………………….……… 
Sl. 
No. 
Contention of the Accused 
(Relevant paras in Appeal 
to be Reproduced 
Comments of the 
Ministry/Division/ 
Department 
Comments to be 
Offered by 
Establishment Division 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.3 
Forwarding of Advance Copies of the 
Appeals/Representations/Petitions etc. 
 
Civil servants are not to send advance copies of their appeals/ representations / 
petitions etc. direct to the higher authorities without going through proper channel which 
is a clear violation of the government instructions on the subject. 
 
2. 
Ministries/Divisions/Departments are, therefore, to instruct their staff to refrain 
from sending advance copies of their appeals/petitions/ representations direct to the higher 
authorities. 
[Authority: Estab. Div.‘s O.M. No. 4/3/95-D-3, dated 26th July, 2002] 
                         
 The role of authorized has not been incorporated in Civil Servants (E&D)  Rules,2020. 

Page -954                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-10 
 
 
 
2.1 
Bar Against Making Joint Representations  
 
According to the existing instructions a petition, memorial or a representation 
should be submitted by a government servant in his own behalf only. An implication of 
these instructions is that joint representations cannot be made to the government. It has 
been observed that some government servants have submitted representations in 
contravention of the spirit of these instructions in that they have individually signed 
copies of petitions containing the same text. Government is of the view that although 
these petitions are signed and sent separately, they are, in effect, tantamount to joint 
representations. No action can, therefore, be taken on such representations. 
 
2. 
The correct procedure is that, if any category of government servants have 
a grievance of a common nature, they should bring the matter to the notice of the head of 
the department concerned so that he may take such action, as may be necessary in the 
circumstances of the case. 
 
3. 
Ministries/Divisions are requested to advise officers and members of the 
staff under their control to keep these instructions in mind while making representations 
in respect of a common grievance. As joint representations are not permitted, a breach of 
these instructions will amount to an act of indiscipline. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.3/1/67-D.II, dated 18-2-1967]. 
2.2 
Appeals/Petitions/Representations by the Civil  
Servants Addressed to the Prime Minister  
 
The Prime Minister's Secretariat have pointed out that disciplinary action has 
been initiated and explanations have been called for in respect of officials whose 
applications were forwarded by that Secretariat to different Ministries and agencies for 
consideration and redressal. While this may well be within the existing rules, it is not in 
harmony with demands of a democratic order as it infringes upon the privilege of Prime 
Minister's Secretariat to forward grievances and requests to the quarters concerned for 
action and redressal under the directives of the Prime Minister as, indeed, it takes away, 
from the civil servants an opportunity of access to the Chief Executive of the country 
through the quickest means possible. 
 
2. 
It is, therefore, advised that steps may please be taken whereby officials 
whose cases are referred for redressal by Prime Minister's Secretariat are not victimized 
and harassed on that account. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M.No.6/3/89-D.3, dated 12-10-1989]. 
2.3 
Withholding of Appeals Under the  
Civil Servants (Appeal) Rules, 1977 
 
Appeals which do not lie under rule 7 of the Civil Servants (Appeal) Rules, 1977 
and the same are not to be transmitted to the Prime Minister under rule 8 of these rules 

CHAPTER-10                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                        Page -955 
 
 
with the recommendations of the authority to reject the appeal. 
 
2. 
As per provisions of rule 8(I) of the Civil Servants (Appeal) Rules, 1977, 
an appeal which is not withheld under rule 7, is required to be forwarded to the appellate 
authority with an expression of opinion by the authority in the form of a speaking order 
foregoing his prerogative to withhold the appeal. Moreover, it would not be fair and 
proper to submit such cases to the appellate authority for rejection which could have been 
withheld by the authority. An appeal which is not entertainable, if transmitted to and rejected by 
the appellate authority, would clearly mean that the appeal has been entertained. 
 
3. 
All Ministries/Divisions are to exercise greatest care while transmitting 
appeals to the appellate authority under rule 3 of the Civil Servants (Appeal) Rules, 1977. 
The appellant should be informed accordingly where appeal is withheld under rule 7 of 
the Civil Servants (Appeal) Rules, 1977. 
[Authority:- Estab. Div.‘s OM No. 8/13/2003-D.3, dated 9th September, 2004] 
Sl.No.3  
Consideration of Cases of Government Servants Who Have Filed Civil Suits  
 
In some cases government servants file civil suits in courts of law against 
government for the redress of their grievances. It has been noticed that the Ministries/ 
Divisions etc. do not deal with such cases on the plea that the government servants have 
filed suits and the matter is ‗subjudice‘. 
 
2. 
A civil suit or a civil petition by a government servant does not preclude 
redress for the aggrieved government servant.  It has, therefore, been decided that the 
Ministries/Divisions should not refrain from considering the cases of government servants 
who have filed civil suits against government for redress of their grievances. Cases of such 
government servants should continue to be considered by the Ministries/Divisions and the 
grievances of the government servants removed if the merits of their cases so warrant. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 2/24/72-D.I dated  28-10-1972]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page -956                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-10 
 
 
II. SERVICE TRIBUNALS 
Sl. No. 4 
The Service Tribunals Act, 1973 (Act No. LXX of 1973) 
 
An Act to provide for the establishment of Service Tribunals to exercise 
jurisdiction in respect of matters relating to the terms and conditions of service of civil 
servants. 
 
WHEREAS it is expedient to provide for the establishment of Administrative 
Tribunals, to be called Service Tribunals, to exercise exclusive jurisdiction in respect of 
matters relating to the terms and conditions of service of civil servants, and for matters 
connected therewith or ancillary thereto. 
 
It is hereby enacted as follows:–  
 
1. Short title, commencement and application.–(1) This Act may be called the 
Service Tribunals Act, 1973. 
 
(2) 
It shall come into force at once. 
 
(3) 
It applies to all civil servants wherever they may be. 
 
2. 
Definitions.–-In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject 
or context, – 
 
[(a) ―civil  servant‖  means a person who is, or has been, a  civil  servant within 
the meaning of the Civil  Servants  Act, 1973  (LXXI  of  1973);] **[and 
shall include a person declared to be a civil servant under section 2(a); 
and] 
 
(b) 
―Tribunal‖ means a Service Tribunal established under section 3. 
 
***2-A [****] 
 
3. 
Tribunals.–@[(1) The President may, by notification in the official 
Gazette, establish one or more Service Tribunals as hereinafter provided and, where there 
are established more than one Tribunal, the President shall specify in the notification the 
territorial limits within which, or the class or classes or cases in respect of which, each 
such Tribunal shall exercise jurisdiction under this Act]. 
 
(2) 
A Tribunal shall have exclusive jurisdiction in respect of matters relating 
to the terms and conditions of service of civil servants, including disciplinary matters. 
 
@[(3) 
A Tribunal shall consist of– 
                         
 Subs. vide Service Tribunals (Amendment) Act XXXI of 1974, dated 6-5-1974. 
** Added vide Service Tribunals (Amendment) Act XVII of 1997, dated 10-6-1997. 
*** Section ―2A‖ which was previously added vide Service Tribunals (Amdt.) Act XVII of 1997, dated 10-6-
1997 has been deleted vide F.23(4)/2010 Service Tribunals (Amdt.) Act No.II of 2010 dated 06-03-2010. 
@Subs. vide Service Tribunals (Amdt.) Act, 2014 Notification No.F.22(23) /2013-Legis dated 17-06-2014. 

CHAPTER-10                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                        Page -957 
 
 
 
(a) 
a Chairman, being a person who has been, or is qualified to be judge of a 
High Court;  
 (b) 
such number of members not less than three, each of whom is or has 
been— 
(i) 
a District Judge; or 
(ii) 
a person who for a period of not less than two years has held a post 
in BS-21 or above or equivalent under the Federal Government or a 
Provincial Government with adequate quasi-judicial or legal 
experience, preference being given to a person having background of 
dealing with service matters; or 
(iii) an Advocate qualified for appointment as Judge of a High Court]. 
 
[(4) The Chairman and members of a Tribunal shall be appointed by the 
President for non-extendable term of three years on such other terms and conditions as the 
President may determine: 
 
Provided that where a serving District Judge or a civil servant is appointed as a 
member he shall hold office for a term of three years or till the date of superannuation, 
whichever is earlier]. 
 
(5) 
The Chairman or a member of a Tribunal may resign his office by writing 
under his hand addressed to the President. 
 
(6) 
The Chairman or a member of a Tribunal shall not hold any other office of 
profit in the service of Pakistan if his remuneration is thereby increased.  
 
*[(7) At any time when— 
(i) 
the Chairman of a Tribunal is absent or is unable to perform the 
functions of his office due to any cause; or 
(ii) 
office of the Chairman is vacant, the most senior of the other 
members of a Tribunal shall act as Chairman till the Chairman 
resumes his office or the regular Chairman is appointed, as the case 
may be]. 
 
**[3-A. Benches of the Tribunal.–(1) The powers and functions of a Tribunal 
may be exercised or performed by Benches consisting of not less than two members of 
Tribunal, including the Chairman, constituted by the Chairman. 
 
(2)  If the members of a bench differ in opinion as to the decision to be given 
on any point,– 
 
(a) 
the point shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority; 
                         
Subs.vide Service Tribunals (Amendment) Act, 2014 Notification No.F.22(23) /2013-Legis dt.17-06-2014. 
**Added vide Ordinance No. IX of 1978, dated 18-3-1978. 

Page -958                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-10 
 
 
 
(b) 
if the members are equally divided and the Chairman of the Tribunal is not 
himself a member of the bench, the case shall be referred to the Chairman 
and the decision of the Tribunal shall be expressed in terms of the opinion 
of the Chairman; and 
 
(c) 
if the members are equally divided and the Chairman of the Tribunal is 
himself a member of the bench, the opinion of the Chairman shall prevail 
and the decision of the Tribunal shall be expressed in terms of the opinion 
of the Chairman]. 
 
4. 
Appeals to Tribunals.–-(1) Any civil servant aggrieved by any *[ ] order, 
whether original or appellate, made by a departmental authority in respect of any of the 
terms and conditions of his service may, within thirty days of the communication of such 
order to him, **[or within six months of the establishment of the appropriate Tribunal, 
whichever is later, prefer an appeal to the Tribunal]: 
 
Provided that— 
(a) 
where an appeal, review or representation to a departmental  authority  is  
provided  under the Civil  Servants Ordinance, 1973, or any rule against 
any such order, no appeal shall lie to a Tribunal unless the aggrieved civil 
servant has preferred an appeal or application for review or representation 
to such departmental authority and a period of ninety days has elapsed 
from the date on which such appeal, application or representation was so 
preferred; ***[  ] 
(b) 
no appeal shall lie to a Tribunal against an order or decision of a 
departmental authority determining the fitness or otherwise of a person to 
be appointed to or hold a particular post or to be promoted to a higher 
grade; @[and] 
 
@@[(c) no appeal shall lie to a Tribunal against an order or decision of a 
departmental authority made at any time before the 1st July, 1969]. 
 
(2)  Where the appeal is against an order or decision of a departmental authority 
imposing a departmental punishment or penalty on a civil servant, the appeal shall be 
preferred– 
 
(a) 
in the case of a penalty of dismissal from service, removal from service, 
compulsory retirement or reduction to a lower post or time-scale or to a 
lower stage in a time-scale, to a Tribunal referred to in sub-section (3) of 
section 3 ;and 
 
(b) 
in any other case, to a Tribunal referred to in sub-section (7) of that 
section. 
 
Explanation.– In this section, ―departmental authority‖ means any authority 
                         
*  Omitted vide Service Tribunals (Amendment) Act No. XVII of 1997, dated 10-6-1997. 
** Subs. vide Service Tribunals (Amendment) Act No. XXXI of 1974, dated 6-5-1974. 
*** The word "and" Omitted vide Service Tribunals (Amendment) Act XXXI of 1974 dated 6.5.1974. 
@ Subs. vide Service Tribunals (Amendment) Act No. XXXI of 1974, dated 6-5-1974. 
@@Added vide  ibid.. 

CHAPTER-10                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                        Page -959 
 
 
other than a Tribunal, which is competent to make an order in respect of any of the terms 
and conditions of civil servants. 
 
*[4A. Review.—(1) A Tribunal shall have the power to review its final order on 
a review petition filed by an aggrieved  party within thirty days of the order on the 
following grounds, namely:— 
(i) 
discovery of new and important matter or evidence which, after exercise of 
due diligence, was not within knowledge of the petitioner or could not be 
produced by him at the time when the order was passed; 
(ii) 
on account of some mistake or error apparent on the face of record; or 
(iii) for any other sufficient cause. 
 
(2)  The Tribunal shall decide the review petition within thirty days. 
 
(3) 
The Tribunal may confirm, set aside, vary or modify the judgment or order 
under review]. 
 
5. 
Powers of Tribunals.–(1) A Tribunal may, on appeal, confirm, set aside, 
vary or modify the order appealed against. 
 
(2) 
A Tribunal shall, for the purpose of deciding any appeal, be deemed to be 
a civil court and shall have the same powers as are vested in such court under the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act V of 1908), including the powers of– 
(a) 
enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) 
compelling the production of documents; and 
(c) 
issuing commission for the examination of witnesses and documents.  
 
(3) A Tribunal shall have the power to execute its decisions in accordance 
with the procedure as may be prescribed. 
 
[5A. Financial powers of a Tribunal.—(1) The Registrar of the Tribunal 
shall be the Principal Accounting Officer of a Tribunal. 
 
(2) 
The Chairman of Tribunal may authorize re-appropriation of funds from 
one head of account to another head of account and sanction expenditure on any item 
from within the allocated budget in accordance with the prescribed procedure without 
reference to Ministry of Finance]. 
 
6.  
Abatement of suit and other proceedings.–All suits, appeals or 
applications regarding any matter within the jurisdiction of a Tribunal pending  
in any court immediately before the commencement of this Act shall abate forthwith: 
 
Provided that any party to such a suit, appeal or application may, within ninety 
days of the @[establishment of the appropriate Tribunal, prefer an appeal to it] in respect 
                         
* Inserted vide Service Tribunals (Amendment) Act,2014 Notification No.F.22(23) /2013-Legis dated 17-06-2014. 
Added vide Service Tribunals(Amdt.)Act,2014 Notification No.F.22(23)/2013-Legis dated 17-06- 2014. 
 Inserted vide ibid. 
@ Subs. vide Service Tribunals (Amendment) Act, XXXI of 1974, dated 06-05-1974. 

Page -960                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-10 
 
 
of any such matter which is in issue in such suit, appeal or application. 
 
7. 
Limitation.–The provisions of sections 5 and 12 of the Limitation Act, 
1908 (IX of 1908), shall apply to appeals under this Act. 
 
8. 
Rules.–(1) The Federal Government may, by notification in the official 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
 
(2) 
In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters namely:– 
 
(a) 
requirements as to the number of members of the Tribunal necessary for 
hearings before, or order or decision by, a Tribunal [or a Bench thereof] [*]; 
 
(b) 
filling for a specified period any vacancy in the office of the Chairman or a 
member of the Tribunal caused by the absence on leave or other-wise of 
the Chairman or, as the case may be, a member [; and] 
 
@[(c) execution of decision of a Tribunal]. 
 
9. 
Repeal.– The Service Tribunals Ordinance, 1973 (XV of 1973), is hereby 
repealed. 
[Authority: The Act received assent of the President on 26-9-1973 and was published  
in the Gazette of Pakistan Extraordinary Part-I, dated 29-9-1973]. 
 
5.1 
The Service Tribunals (Procedure) Rules, 1974 
 
In  exercise  of  the  powers conferred by  section  8  of the Service  Tribunals  
Act,  1973  (LXX  of  1973), the  Federal Government is pleased to make the following 
rules, namely:— 
THE SERVICE TRIBUNALS (PROCEDURE) RULES, 1974 
 
1. 
These rules may be called the Service Tribunals (Procedure) Rules, 1974. 
 
2. 
(1) In these rules, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or 
context,— 
 
(a) 
―Act‖ means the Service Tribunals Act, 1973 (LXX of 1973). 
 
(b) 
―Chairman‖ means the Chairman of a Tribunal. 
 
(c) 
―Member‖ means a member of a Tribunal and includes the Chairman; and 
 
(d) 
―Registrar‖ means the Registrar of a Tribunal and includes any other 
person authorised by the Tribunal to perform the functions of the Registrar 
                         
Subs. vide Service Tribunals (Amendment) Act, XXXI of 1974, dated 06-05-1974. 
 Omitted vide Service Tribunals (Amdt.) Act, 2014 Notification No.F.22(23) /2013-Legis dated  17-06-2014. 
Subs. vide ibid.  
@Added vide Service Tribunals (Amdt.) Act,2014 Notification No.F.22(23) /2013-Legis dated 17-06-2014. 

CHAPTER-10                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                        Page -961 
 
 
under these rules. 
 
(2) 
Words and expressions used but not defined in these rules shall have the 
same meaning as are assigned to them in the Act. 
 
3. 
(1) The permanent seat of a Tribunal shall be at a place which the Federal 
Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, appoint. 
 
(2) 
A Tribunal shall ordinarily hold its sittings at its permanent seat but it may 
hold its sittings at any other place within its jurisdiction if in its opinion the holding of 
sittings at such other place will be convenient to the parties to the proceedings before it. 
 
4. 
(1) A Tribunal shall ordinarily observe the same hours as are observed by 
the offices of the Federal Government. 
 
(2) 
A Tribunal shall observe the holidays notified by the Federal Government. 
 
5. 
(1) An appeal to a Tribunal may be sent to the Registrar by registered post 
acknowledgement due or presented to him during office hours either by the appellant 
personally or through his advocate. 
 
(2)  Appeals presented to or received by any member shall be deemed to be 
properly presented or received under this rule. 
 
6. 
Every memorandum of appeal shall — 
  *[(1)] (a)  be legibly, correctly and concisely written, type-written or printed; 
 
(b) 
be divided into paragraphs, numbered consecutively, each paragraph 
containing, as nearly as may be, a separate assertion or averment; 
 
(c) 
contain the full name, official designation and place of posting of 
each party; 
 
(d) 
clearly set out the relief claimed; 
 
(e) 
be accompanied by — 
 
 
 
(i) 
a copy of the final order, whether original or appellate, and 
any other order of the competent authority in respect of any of 
the terms and conditions of service of the appellant against 
which the appeal is preferred; and 
 
 
 
(ii) 
copies of rules, orders and other documents on which the 
appellant proposes to rely in support of his claim; 
 
(f) 
be signed or thumb impressed by the appellant; and 
 
(g) 
be accompanied by three spare copies of the memorandum of appeal 
and as many other copies thereof, duly signed or thumb-impressed 
                         
* Renumbered vide Estt. Division‘s Notification No. SRO 1100(1)/83, dated 23-11-1983. 

Page -962                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-10 
 
 
by the appellant and accompanied by the documents referred to in 
clause (e), as there are respondents:  
 
 
 
Provided that where a Tribunal is satisfied that it is not 
possible for any appellant to produce any document referred to in 
clause (e) it may waive the provisions of the clause. 
 
*[(2) If malice, fraudulent intention, knowledge or other condition of mind, 
including legal or factual malafide, is alleged in an appeal, the 
memorandum of appeal shall state clearly the facts constituting such 
malice, fraudulent intention, knowledge or other condition of mind or, as 
the case may be legal or factual malafide, and be accompanied, besides the 
documents specified in clause (e) of sub-rule (1), by a summary of the 
documentary or oral evidence which the appellant proposes to produce in 
proof of the allegation and an affidavit in support of the contents of the 
summary]. 
 
7. 
In every memorandum of appeal, the competent authority against whose 
orders the appeal is preferred and any other party to the dispute shall be shown as 
respondents. 
 
8. 
Where an appeal is presented after the period of limitation prescribed in 
the Act, it shall be accompanied by a petition supported by an affidavit setting forth the 
cause of delay. 
 
9. 
No court-fee shall be payable for preferring an appeal to, or filing, 
exhibiting or recording any document with a Tribunal. 
 
10. 
(1) The Registrar shall scrutinize every memorandum of appeal received 
by him, and shall — 
 
 (i) 
if it is drawn up in accordance with the provisions of rule 6, cause it to be 
registered in the register of appeals, to be maintained in form appended 
to these rules and shall, with the approval of the Chairman, fix a date for 
its preliminary hearing before the Tribunal; and 
 
 (ii) if it is not drawn up in accordance with the provisions of rule 6, return it to 
the appellant for amendment, within a time to be specified in an order to 
be recorded by him on the memorandum of appeal, which shall in no case 
be less than fourteen days, pointing out the deficiency. 
 
(2)  If the memorandum of appeal is not resubmitted within the period 
specified under clause (ii) of sub-rule (1), the appeal shall stand dismissed. 
 
11. 
(1) A Tribunal may, after hearing the appellant or his advocate dismiss the 
appeal in limine. 
                         
* Added vide Estt. Division‘s Notification No. SRO 1100(I)/81, dated 23-11-1983. 
 See Form A (attached to the rules). 
‘L’ - on the threshold. 

CHAPTER-10                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                        Page -963 
 
 
 
  (2) If the appeal is not dismissed in limine, notice of admission of appeal and 
of the day fixed for its hearing shall, subject to the provisions of sub-rule (3), be served on 
the appellant, the respondents and on such other persons as the Tribunal may deem proper. 
 
(3) 
The appellant shall, within one week of the receipt of the notice of 
admission of his appeal, or within such extended period as may be allowed by the 
Registrar, deposit with the Registrar:- 
 
(a) 
cash security for costs in the sum of Rs. 100; and 
 
(b) 
cost of service of notice on the respondents. 
 
(4) 
If the appellant does not comply with the provisions of sub-rule (3), his 
appeal may be dismissed by the Tribunal. 
 
12. 
(1) A notice under sub-rule (2) of rule 11 shall be in such form as may be 
laid down by a Tribunal and may be served by registered post or in any other manner, 
including publication in one or more daily newspapers, as the Tribunal may direct: 
 
Provided that a notice shall not be issued for publication in a newspaper until the 
costs of such publication are deposited by the appellant. 
 
(2) 
The notice to a respondent shall, except where it is published in a 
newspaper, be accompanied by a copy of the memorandum of appeal and of the 
documents appended thereto. 
 
(3) 
Service of notice in accordance with the provisions of this rule shall be 
deemed to be due notice, and it shall not be necessary to prove that a party has actually 
received the notice. 
 
13. 
(1) A respondent on whom a notice of appeal has been served under rule 
12, may send his objections to the appeal by registered post acknowledgement due to the 
Registrar so as to reach him, or deliver the same to the Registrar either personally or 
through his advocate not later than seven days before the date specified in the notice for 
hearing of the appeal or within such extended period as may be allowed by the Registrar. 
 
(2) 
The objection shall be legibly, correctly and concisely written, type-written 
or printed, shall be signed by the respondent or by a person authorised by him in that 
behalf and shall be accompanied by a copy of every document on which the respondent 
wishes to rely in support of his objections. 
 
(3) 
The written objections shall be accompanied by four spare copies thereof, 
complete in all respects, for use of the members of the Tribunal and the appellant. 
 
(4) 
In case objections are not received or delivered within the time allowed 
under sub-rule (1), the respondent may be proceeded against ex-parte. 

Page -964                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-10 
 
 
 
14. 
Questions arising for determination by a Tribunal shall be decided 
ordinarily upon affidavits and documents proved by affidavits, but the Tribunal may 
direct that such questions as it may consider necessary shall be decided on such other 
evidence and in such manner as it may deem fit. 
 
15. 
(1) An application for summoning witnesses before a Tribunal shall be 
made as soon as possible after the issue of notice of admission of appeal under rule 11 
and shall state:— 
 
(a) 
the names, designations and addresses of the witnesses to be summoned; 
and 
 
(b) 
a brief resume of the evidence which each witness is expected to give. 
 
(2) 
If the Tribunal is of the opinion that the evidence of any witness specified 
in the list of witnesses given under sub-rule (1) may be of material assistance in the 
disposal of an appeal before it, it shall direct him to be summoned on a date to be fixed by 
the Tribunal, and direct that the daily allowance and travelling charges of such witness 
should be deposited by the person calling him within seven days of the date of the order. 
 
(3) 
The Tribunal may, by general or special order, prescribe the rates of daily 
allowance and travelling charges to be paid to witnesses summoned by it. 
 
(4) 
If a person applying for the summoning of a witness fails to deposit the 
requisite costs of the witness within the period specified in sub-rule (2), or within such 
extended period as may be allowed by the Tribunal, the application for summoning of 
witnesses, so far as it relates to such witness, shall be deemed to have been rejected. 
 
(5) 
If the Tribunal is of the opinion that the evidence of any witness is 
necessary for the disposal of an appeal before it, it may direct him to be summoned. 
 
(6) 
Where the Tribunal summons a witness under the provisions of 
sub-rule (5):— 
 
(a) 
if such witness is a Government servant, his travelling and daily 
allowances, if any, shall be payable by the Government; and 
 
(b) 
if such witness is a private person, his travelling and daily allowance shall 
be payable by such party and to such extent as may be determined by the 
Tribunal. 
 
16. 
(1) A process for service on a witness of high rank shall be sent in the form 
of a letter. 
 
(2) 
Except in urgent cases or as may otherwise be ordered by a Tribunal, a 
summon to a Government servant shall be served through the head of his office. 

CHAPTER-10                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                        Page -965 
 
 
 
17. 
(1) A Daily Cause List shall be prepared under the orders of the Registrar 
which shall be affixed on the notice board of the Court room of the Tribunal. 
 
(2) 
Except as otherwise directed by the Tribunal, cases shall be set down in 
the Cause List in the order of the date of admission. 
 
18. 
(1) A Tribunal may, if it considers necessary, appoint an officer of the 
Tribunal to record evidence of a witness for and on behalf of the Tribunal. 
 
(2) 
Evidence of a witness examined by or on behalf of a Tribunal shall be 
taken ordinarily in the form of a narrative, and shall be signed by the recording officer 
and countersigned by the members and shall form part of the record. 
 
(3) 
The parties or their advocates may suggest any questions to be put to a 
witness and a member may, besides such questions, put any other questions to the witness. 
 
(4) 
A Tribunal may, in the interest of justice, close the evidence of any party 
if, in its opinion, the production or continuation of such evidence would involve 
inordinate delay or unnecessary expenses. 
 
19. 
(1) If, on the date fixed for the hearing of an appeal, or on any other 
subsequent date to which the hearing may have been adjourned, the appellant or his 
advocate is not present before a Tribunal, the Tribunal may dismiss the appeal or, if it 
thinks fit, may proceed to hear the other party and decide the appeal. 
 
(2) 
If, on the date fixed for the hearing of an appeal, or on any subsequent date 
to which the hearing may have been adjourned, the respondent or any one or more of the 
respondents, in case there are more than one respondents, or his or their advocates are not 
present before the Tribunal, the Tribunal may hear the appeal ex-parte against all or any 
of the respondents who, and whose advocates are so absent. 
 
(3) 
When an appeal has been dismissed under sub-rule (1) or ex-parte 
proceedings have been taken under sub-rule (2), the Tribunal may, on such order as to 
costs as it may deem fit, restore the appeal or, as the case may be, set aside the ex-parte 
order or allow the defaulting party to rejoin the proceedings. 
 
20.  (1) A Tribunal may make such order as to costs of proceedings before it as 
it may deem fit and such costs shall be paid out of the cash security deposited under 
clause (a) of sub-rule (3) or rule 11. 
 
(2)  If, after deduction of the costs of proceedings under sub-rule (1), any 
amount deposited under clause (a) of sub-rule (3) of rule 11 remains unutilized, it shall be 
returned to the appellant. 
 

Page -966                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                       CHAPTER-10 
 
 
 
*21. (1) The Tribunal shall, after the order is signed cause certified copies 
thereof to be sent under registered cover to the parties concerned and shall deliver a copy 
to the Secretary, Establishment Division, **[and the Solicitor, Law Division]. 
 
(2) 
Any party to the appeal may obtain additional copies of the order on 
payment of such legal fees, as the Tribunal may from time to time fix. 
 
22. 
Clerical or arithmetical mistakes arising in an order of final adjudication 
from any accidental slip or omission may at any time, be corrected by a Tribunal either on 
its own motion or on an application made by any of the parties: 
 
Provided that every such application shall be duly supported by an affidavit. 
 
23. 
 If a Tribunal is unable to arrive at a unanimous decision, its decision shall 
be expressed in terms of the view of the majority. 
 
***[23A. Where a party to an appeal decided by a Tribunal desires execution of the 
decision it may make application to Tribunal which may pass order in accordance with 
the provisions of the Act].  
 
24. 
If any member of a Tribunal is, for any reason, unable to take part in the 
proceedings of the Tribunal, the other members may hear or continue to hear the appeal 
but the decision of the Tribunal shall be shown to the absentee member and, if such 
member has any view to express, the same may be recorded and the decision of the 
Tribunal shall be expressed in terms of the view of the majority. 
 
25. 
A casual vacancy in the office of the Chairman or a member of a Tribunal 
caused by the absence on leave or otherwise of the Chairman or, as the case may be, a 
member may be filled by the President for a specified period by appointment of a person 
who is qualified to be the Chairman or, as the case may be, a member of a Tribunal. 
 
26. 
The language of a Tribunal shall be English, but use may be made of the 
National or any one of the regional languages subject to the prior permission of the 
Tribunal. 
 
27. 
A Tribunal may issue instructions in regard to supply of copies to, and 
inspection of record by parties to proceedings before it.  
[Authority.— Estt. Division‘s Notification No. S.R.O. 1199(1)/74, dated 14-9-1974]. 
 
 
                         
* Subs. vide Estt. Division‘s Notification No. SRO 1111(1)/75, dated 6-11-1975. 
** Subs. vide Estt. Division‘s Notification No. S.R.O. 427(1)79, dated 20-5-1979. 
*** Inserted vide Establishment Division‘s S.R.O No. 743(I)/2019 dated 4th July,2019.  

CHAPTER-10                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                        Page -967 
 
 
FORM ‘A’ 
 
REGISTER OF APPEALS 
                                             
Sl. 
No. 
Date of 
Presentation of 
appeal 
Name and 
address of the 
appellant 
Name and 
address of the 
respondents 
Date of 
registration of 
the appeal 
Whether 
admitted or 
dismissed in 
limine, with 
date of order 
Amount of cash 
security and costs 
deposited by the 
appellant 
Date of 
final order 
Brief substance 
of the final order 
Date on which 
copy of the final 
order sent to the 
competent 
authority 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page -968                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                        CHAPTER-10 
 
 
 
5.2 
Placement of Members in MP-I Scale 
 
In terms of Section 3(4) of the Service Tribunal Act,1973, competent authority is 
pleased to approve following terms and conditions in respect of various categories of 
members of Federal Service Tribunal (FST) with effect from 1st July,2018:— 
i) 
All such members who were in any executive cadre of government service 
in BS-21 or BS-22 shall be placed in the MP-I Scale, as amended by the 
Finance Division from time to time; and: 
ii) All such members who remained judicial officers will be entitled to draw 
pay and allowances equivalent to the last pay drawn as judicial officers. 
[Authority:— Establishment Division‘s Notification No. 21/3/2017-E-I dated 30-05-2018]. 
 
5.3 
Placement of Retired Judicial Officers in MP-I Scale 
 
In partial notification of Establishment Division‘s notification No.21/3/ 2017-E-I 
dated 30-05-2018, the competent authority is pleased to approve that retired judicial 
officers (District and Session Judges) and Advocates qualified to be a judge of High 
Court, appointed as Members Judicial, Federal Service Tribunal, are placed in the MP-I 
Scale, to allow them to draw pay and package similar to Executive Members, as amended 
by the Finance Division from time to time.  
  [Authority:— Establishment Division‘s Notification No. 21/3/2017-E-I dated 16-10-2019]. 
 
5.4 
Permanent Seat of the Service Tribunal 
 
In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-rule (1) of rule 3 of the Service 
Tribunals (Procedure) Rules, 1974, the Federal Government is pleased to appoint 
Islamabad to be the place at which the Service Tribunal established under the 
Establishment Division Notification No. S.R.O. 242(1)/74, dated the 22nd February, 
1974, shall have its permanent seat. 
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s Notification No. 15/l/73-CV., dated 29-10-1974]. 
 
6.1 
Defence of Cases in the Tribunal and Law Courts 
 
The following guidelines and instructions are to be observed by the 
Ministries/Divisions/Attached Departments in regard to Appeals/Writ Petitions/ Suits 
preferred by the aggrieved civil servants before Service Tribunals, High Courts and civil 
law courts against final orders affecting the terms and conditions of service, including 
cases where penalty has been awarded under the Government Servants (Efficiency and 
Discipline) Rules, 1973:- 
(i) 
After the promulgation of the Service Tribunals Act, 1973, the jurisdiction 
in all matters pertaining to the terms and conditions of the Civil Servants, 
                         
Now Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules,2020. 

CHAPTER-10                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                 Page- 969 
 
 
including orders passed under Government Servants (Efficiency and 
Discipline) Rules 1973 rest with the Tribunal and to that extent, the 
jurisdiction of the High Courts and the Civil Courts has been ousted. In 
cases where Writ Petitions/Civil Suits are filed, they should be contested 
on the point of jurisdiction. 
(ii) 
In Appeals/Writ Petitions/Civil Suits against orders passed by the 
Ministries/Divisions, the responsibility of defending such cases      is of the 
Ministry / Division / Attached Department concerned. However, in view of 
the fact that Establishment Division is made proforma party in most of the 
cases, the cases are referred routinely to Establishment Division which 
results in loss of time. It is clarified that where the final orders have been 
passed by the Ministry/ Division other than the Establishment Division no 
reference should be made to the Establishment Division unless there is a 
specific point of reference, in which case the issue should be clearly 
specified and necessary papers supplied as annex in a self contained 
reference. It would not be possible for the Establishment Division to 
respond to general queries or a general request for advice in such cases. 
(iii) In cases where the Ministries/Divisions are the principal respondent, 
arrangement for submission of parawise comments well in time and 
appointment of counsels to defend the case should be made in consultation 
with the Law Division.  The Federal Service Tribunal is presently not 
happy about the delays in filing parawise comments and the proper defence 
of the cases before them by the Ministries/ Divisions. 
[(iii-a) The government departments should assure that no case goes 
unrepresented before any court/tribunal. A responsible officer well 
conversant with the case, alongwith government counsel should always be 
deputed to represent the government and assist the court/tribunal on the 
basis of departmental record and the policy stand taken in the case.]   
(iv) In defending the appeals before the Service Tribunals, the question of 
limitation should be carefully examined, and the appeals contested on this 
ground where appeals are time barred. 
(v) 
The Ministries/Divisions are also required to examine those cases which 
are decided against the government by the Service Tribunal in their 
capacity as the main respondent, with a view to filing an appeal before the 
Supreme Court in consultation with the Law Division directly. Such cases 
need not to be referred to this Division for examination. 
[(vi) 
In case it is decided, in consultation with the Law and Justice Division, 
that an order passed by the Tribunal does not involve any substantial 
question of law of public importance for moving a CPSLA before the 
                         
 Inserted vide per Establishment Division‘s O.M No. 1/1/95-Lit.2/Misc. dated 30-08-1995 read with O.M No. 
2/19/93-Lit.3, dated 28-05-1994 and O.M No. 1/23/94-Lit.2, dated 03-11-1994. These instructions were re-
emphasized vide Establishment Division‘s U.O No. 2/6/2019-Lit-I, dated 16-08-2019.  
Inserted vide Establishment Division‘s O.M No. F.10/14/92-Lit.I, dated 04-05-1993. These instructions were 
re-emphasized vide Establishment Division‘s U.O No. 2/6/2019-Lit-I, dated 16-08-2019.    

Page -970                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                        CHAPTER-10 
 
 
Supreme Court of Pakistan, the order should be implemented forthwith 
under intimation to the Registrar, Federal Service Tribunal, Islamabad.  
[(vii) 
Instances have come to the notice where Federal Service Tribunal or High 
Courts passed orders against the Government and no CPLAs were filed in 
the Supreme Court of Pakistan; resultantly, such orders became precedents 
and cause of multiple litigations. The Prime Minster has desired that all 
legal remedies be exhausted in cases of service matter litigations as any 
interim decision becomes precedent for all future cases.   
[Authority.- Estt. Division‘s O.M. No. 14/5/80-Lit. Misc., dated 7-3-1982]. 
 
Note.- For detailed instructions regarding the conduct of cases of the Federal Government in 
courts (including service appeals before the Service Tribunal), see Appendix ‘F’ of the 
Secretariat Instructions (2004 Edition Pages 119-129). 
 
6.2 
Letter of Attorney General of Pakistan Regarding Implementation 
 
 
of Orders of the Federal Service Tribunal and High Courts Appealed  
 
 
Against in Supreme Court of Pakistan 
It has been observed that orders passed in service matters by the Federal Service 
Tribunal decided against the government are not implemented as per directions given in 
the respective orders. The government departments postpone the implementation of the 
orders of the Federal Service Tribunal on the grounds that CPLA is preferred against the 
order and wait for the disposal of the matter by the Honorable Supreme Court of Pakistan. 
The government departments are hereby informed that unless the order of FST is 
suspended specifically by an order of the Supreme Court, the same must be implemented 
forthwith. However, a clause may be added in the implementation orders that it shall be 
subject to the final decision of the matter by the Honorable Supreme Court of Pakistan. 
This eventuality of informing the government departments has arisen because recently the 
Honorable Supreme Court of Pakistan has started taking a very serious note of this fact 
and in some of the cases, heavy costs up to Rs. 50,000/- has been imposed by the 
Honorable Supreme Court of Pakistan simply for the reason that the government 
department has not implemented the orders during the pendency of the CPLA, without 
there being any order of suspension of the orders appealed against. The matter must be 
attended to urgently in order to avoid any further financial loss to the national exchequer. 
Thus all the matters which are decided by the FST or which are pending in the Honorable 
Supreme Court of Pakistan or which may be instituted before the Honorable Supreme 
Court of Pakistan against any order passed by the FST, directing the reinstatement or 
granting some other relief to a civil servant, be complied with forthwith, unless the order 
appealed against is specifically suspended by the Honorable Supreme Court of Pakistan. 
 
2. 
The Secretary Establishment is further requested to convey this message to 
all the departments concerned of the government in respect of which the service matters 
crop up before the FST or before the Honorable Supreme Court of Pakistan for necessary 
action. 
[Authority:- Office of the Attorney General for Pakistan's DO No. 1(5)2006-AGP, dated 2-3-2006] 
                         
 Inserted vide Establishment Division‘s O.M No. F.2/9/2016-Lit.I, dated 24-05-2016. 

CHAPTER-10                        ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                                 Page- 971 
 
 
 
6.3 
Letter of Chairman FST Making Suggestions 
to Reduce Pending Litigation 
 
The worthy Chairman, Federal Service Tribunal vide his d.o letter dated 26th 
July,2019 (Copy not reproduced) has invited attention of Secretary Establishment Division 
to the following:— 
 
Decisions on appeal are delayed for want of parawise comments from 
Ministries/Divisions; 
 
Government departments are not represented at appropriate higher  level; 
 
Implementation of judgments/Decisions is subjected to unreasonable delay 
by Ministries/Divisions.  
2. 
The worthy Chairman has, therefore, suggested that a ‗Special Cell‘ may be 
created in all Ministries/Divisions at the appropriate level to keep the Establishment Division 
informed on regular basis about pendency or disposal of the appeals in the Tribunal.  
3. 
Instructions of the Establishment Division are already available in 
ESTACODE 2015 at pages 1047 to 1051, emphasizing timely submission of parawise 
comments, projection of the Government viewpoint through responsible officers and 
implementation of the judgments that attained finality or not suspended/set aside by the 
Supreme Court. These instructions are in addition to Appendix-F to Secretariat Instructions.  
4. 
Ministries/Divisions are requested to strictly observe the instructions already 
holding the field and may also strengthen their own mechanisms to watch progress of Court 
cases in the light of Paragraph 12 of Appendix-F to Secretariat Instructions which inter alia 
provides that,— 
 
―It is, therefore, imperative that in each Division/Department, a Section, 
hereinafter referred to as the Litigation Section, should be earmarked for dealing 
with or co-ordinating the litigation cases. This Section should receive all 
summons/notices from courts, maintain a nominal index of litigation cases in the 
following form, in a Register, and keep a watch over their progress.  
Name of parties Nature of cases 
Subject 
Court 
Counsel 
File No. 
Result 
ABC vs Pakistan 
Civil suit or 
appeal 
Service matter, 
arbitration 
High Court, 
Peshawar 
A.G., 
Peshawar 
- 
Dismissed 
[Authority:— Establishment Division‘s U.O No. 2/6/2019-Lit-I dated 16-08-2019]. 
___________________ 
 
 
 

Page -972                          ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)                        CHAPTER-10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PCPPI—7254(22)PPARC—29-06-2022—1000 Copies (Pc-2). 

 INDEX                  ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)               
Page-973 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INDEX 
(973 - 974) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page-974                 ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)             
INDEX 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 INDEX                  ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)               
Page-975 
 
 
A 
 
Absence 
 
...................from Duty Without Leave  
940 
...............from Office Due to Curfew to be Treated as Casual Leave 
503 
Leaving Headquarters During Holidays or Casual Leave: ................. from 
Headquarters  
489 
Grant of Arrears of Pay and Allowances to Government Servants for Period of 
............... from Duty, On Re-Instatement as a Result of Court's Decisions 
833 
Grant of Arrears of Pay and Allowances to Govt. Servants for Period of 
............... from Duty, on Reinstatement as a Result of Court‟s Decision  
836 
Acceptance 
 
............... of Foreign Awards by Government Servants 
759 
............... of Foreign Trips Sponsored By Commercial Firms  
758-759 
Bar Against ............... of Gratification by Grade 1-3 Employees on Occasions 
of Eid etc. from Public 
758 
Bar Against Demanding Dowry and ............... of Gifts on Occasions of 
Marriages 
757-758 
Procedure For the ............... and Disposal of Gifts 
754-757 
Accommodation  
 
Provision of Government .......................... to all Government Servants Employed 
on Contract after Superannuation 
457 
Provision of .......................... to Persons Employed on Contract by Organizations 
from Own Available .......................... 
457 
Acting Charge/Additional Charge 
 
...................Appointment – Counting of Service 
381-382 
...................Appointment : Procedure and Remuneration 
379-380 
Appointment on................... Basis 
381 
Combination of Charge/................... Appointment Not to Be Notified 
380 
Act 
 
Civil Servants ..................., 1973 (................... No. LXXI of 1973) 
317-327 
Clarification Regarding Detention of Government Servants Under Public 
Safety ................... 
837 
Counting of Service 
Rendered Against Higher Post Under Section 10 of 
the Civil Servants ..................., 1973 
673-674 
Detention of Government Servants under the Public Safety ...................s   
836-837 
Ex-Government 
Servants 
(Employment 
with 
Foreign 
Governments) 
(Prohibition)...................,1966 (................... No. XII of 1966) 
923-924 
ICT Rights of Persons with Disability …………., 2020 
131-146 
The Federal Investigation Agency, ................... 1974 (................... VIII of 1975) 
845-850 
The Service Tribunals ..................., 1973   (................... No. LXX of 1973) 
956-960 

Page-976                 ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)             
INDEX 
 
 
Ad hoc 
 
................... Appointees to Be Clearly Told of the Conditions of Their 
Appointments 
383 
................... Appointments and Approval for Extension 
384 
Advertisement for ................... Appointments 
383 
Bar against Promotion of ................... Appointees 
703 
Counting of ................... Service for the Purpose of Promotion 
673 
Proposals for Continuance of ................... Appointments 
383-384 
Seniority of ................... Appointees for Purposes of Reversion or Termination 
of Services on Availability of Regular Appointees 
385 
Submission of Summaries Regarding ................... Appointments 
384-385 
Age 
 
Clarification Regarding General Relaxation of 5 Years in Upper ................... 
Limit Prescribed in Recruitment Rules 
359-361 
Initial Appointment to Civil Posts (Relaxation of Upper ................... Limit) 
Rules, 1993 
358-359 
Notifying Retirement of an Officer on Attaining the ................... of 
Superannuation 
907 
Re-employment of Consultant After the ................... of Superannuation 
404 
Relaxation in Upper ................... Limit to Persons Employed in Government 
Department on Contract Basis 
361-362 
Retirement on Completion of Sixtieth Year of ................... 
903-904 
False or Forged Information about Educational Qualifications and ............... and 
Pakistan Penal Code 
839-840 
Agitation 
 
Taking Part in Politics - Bar against Supporting Students ...............(s) 
791 
Allowance (s) 
 
Bar Against the Use of the Term "Deputation ..................." 
571-572 
Clarification About Deputation ................... 
571 
Fixation of Pay and ...................s of Re-employed Government Servants – 
Principles for Fixation of Pay 
926-927 
Grant of ...................s During Re-employment/Contractual Appointment 
927-928 
Grant of Deputation ................... 
570-571 
Revision of Transfer Grant, Transportation of Motorcar/Motorcycle/ Scooter and 
Mileage ................... 
914-915 
Revision of Traveling Allowance .......................s (Within Pakistan) 
910-911 
Time Limit for Availing of the Concession of Travelling ................... After 
Retirement – Admissibility in Re-employment in Government 
913 
Time-Limit for Availing of the Concession of Travelling ................... After 
Retirement 
912 
Travelling ................... for Journey on Retirement (for Mission Abroad) 
910 
Grant of Arrears of Pay and ...............s to Government Servants for Period of 
833 

 INDEX                  ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)               
Page-977 
 
 
Absence from Duty, On Re-Instatement as a Result of Court's Decisions 
Grant of Arrears of Pay and ...............s to Government Servants for Period of 
Absence from Duty, On Re-Instatement as a Result of Court's Decisions 
836 
Antecedents 
 
Verification of ...................on First Appointment 
348-356 
Appeals 
 
...............s/Petitions/Representations by the Civil Servants Addressed to the 
Prime Minister 
954 
Civil Servants (...............) Rules, 1977 
949-952 
Forwarding of Advance Copies of the ...............s/Representations/ Petitions etc. 
953 
Guidelines for Submission of ...............s/Representations to the Chief 
Executive/President 
952-953 
Letter of Attorney General of Pakistan Regarding Implementation of Orders of 
the Federal Service Tribunal and High Courts ...............ed Against in Supreme 
Court of Pakistan 
970 
Withholding of ...............s Under the Civil Servants (...............) Rules,1977 
954-955 
Application 
 
……………… of Instructions for Induction/Re-employment of Armed Forces 
Officers in Autonomous Bodies – Amendment in Recruitment Rules 
302 
................... of Instructions for Induction/Re-employment of Armed Forces 
Officers to Autonomous Bodies 
297 
................... of Section Officers for Ex-Cadre Posts 
576-577 
...................s of Section Officers 
552 
Appropriate Authority for Forwarding of ...................s Through Proper Channel 
552 
Avoidance of  Delay in Forwarding ...................s of Government Servants to the 
F.P.S.C 
552-553 
Competitive Examinations/Selections Held by FPSC – ...................s of 
Departmental Candidates 
553 
Failure of the Provincial Governments and Federal Ministries/Divisions to 
Inform the F.P.S.C. about Withholding of ................... Within One Month of 
the Closing Date Not to Affect the Candidate‟s Selection/Appointment 
543 
General Instructions for Submission of ...................s for Various Posts- 
Competitive Examination-Number of Chances for Government Servants who are 
in Grade-16 and Below 
550-551 
Government Servants (...................s for Services and Posts) Rules, 1966 
540-542 
Isolated Posts – ................... of Provincial/Regional Quotas 
130 
Practice of Withholding/Forwarding of ...................s of Departmental Candidates 
to FPSC 
553 
Clarification of ............... of Instructions Regarding Radio Broadcasts to 
Employees of Autonomous Bodies 
790-791 
Appointment (s) 
 
Acting Charge ................... – Counting of Service 
381-382 

Page-978                 ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)             
INDEX 
 
 
Additional Charge ................... : Procedure and Remuneration 
379-380 
Ad-Hoc ...................s and Approval for Extension 
384 
Ad-Hoc Appointees to Be Clearly Told of the Conditions of Their ...................s 
383 
Advertisement for Ad-Hoc ...................s 
383 
................... of Council Assistant 
668-669 
................... of Officers on Current Charge Against Higher Posts and Payment 
of Additional Remuneration Therefor 
376-377 
Guidelines for ……………… of Officers on Current Charge Against Higher 
Post and Payment of Additional Remuneration Therefor 
377-378 
…………………. on Employees Son Quota Under Prime Minister‟s Assistance 
Package   
437-438 
……………… by Transfer in Office Management Group (OMG) (Conduct of 
examination) Rules,2020 
196-218 
................... of Provincial Government Employees Against Grade 17 and Above 
Posts Under the Federal Government 
580-581 
 
................... of Secretaries to Government 
386-387 
................... on Acting Charge Basis 
381 
................... on Contract Basis 
363-365 
........................... to Upgraded Posts 
415 
Civil Servants (..................., Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973 
327-336 
Clarification on Protection of Pay of Gazetted Contract Employees on 
Regularization/……………… on Regular Basis 
372 
Combination of ...................s – Authorization to Secretaries 
379 
Combination of ...................s 
378 
Combination of Charge/Additional Charge ................... Not to Be Notified 
380 
Continuance of the Practice of Notifying All ...................s in BPS 16 or Above in 
the Gazette 
399 
Conditions for ..............., Promotion and Transfer Rules for Assistant Incharge, 
Stenotypist, Assistant, UDC and LDC 
340-342 
Conditions for ......................., Promotion and Transfer Rules for Private 
Secretary, Superintendent and Stenographer 
342-344 
Current Charge ................... – Determination of Seniority Within an Organization 
375 
Current/Additional Charge and Acting Charge ...................s 
373-374 
Deputation Not a Method of ................... 
560-561 
Detailed Recruitment Rules Not Necessary Only Method of ..........................., 
Qualifications, Experience etc. to be Notified 
118-120 
Eligibility of Officers for ................... in Secretariat Posts 
265 
Extension in Current Charge ................... 
375-376 
Extension in the Period of Contract ...................s for Posts Outside the Purview 
of FPSC 
 
369-370 

 INDEX                  ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)               
Page-979 
 
 
Failure of the Provincial Governments and Federal Ministries/Divisions to 
Inform the F.P.S.C. about Withholding of Application Within One Month of 
the Closing Date Not to Affect the Candidate‟s Selection/................... 
543 
Framing of Recruitment Rules – Making Ad-Hoc ...................s 
122 
General Criteria for Need Assessment, Recruitment and Performance Evaluation 
for Hiring Contractual ................... in Special Professional Pay Scale (SPPS-I,II & 
III) in Ministries/Divisions 
452-455 
Clarification Regarding General Criteria for Need Assessment, Recruitment and 
Performance Evaluation for Hiring Contractual ................... in Special 
Professional Pay Scale (SPPS-I,II & III) in Ministries/Divisions 
455-456 
Grant of Allowances During Re-employment/Contractual ...................  
927-928 
Guidelines for ................... of Consultants – Designing of a Proforma 
408-410 
Guidelines for ................... of Consultants 
405-408 
Guidelines for ................... on Contract Basis 
365-367 
Indication of Date of Superannuation of Officers Proposed for ......................to 
Tenure Posts 
917-918 
Initial ................... to Civil Posts (Relaxation of Upper Age Limit) Rules, 1993 358-359 
Method and Conditions of ................... to Posts in BPS 4 and Below 
345-348 
Mode of Notifying ...................s, Promotions etc., after Introduction of  the 
Scheme of Basic Pay Scales 
396-398 
Other Short-Term ...................s 
400 
Policy Guidelines for Foreign ………………s and Postings in Pakistan Missions 
Abroad and Against Pakistan‟s Seats in International, Multilateral, Bilateral and 
Regional Organizations, FORA and Bodies 
533-534 
Policy Guidelines for Contract ...................s for Posts in Autonomous/Semi-
Autonomous Bodies, Corporations, Public Sector Companies etc. Owned and 
Managed by the Federal Government 
367-368 
Procedure for Creation of Posts of Officer on Special Duty (O.S.D.) and Making 
...................s Thereto 
401-403 
Procedure for Selection of Candidates for ................... in Pakistan Missions 
Abroad 
520 
Proposals for Continuance of Ad-Hoc ...................s 
383-384 
Protection of Pay of Contract Employees on Regularization/............................. 
on Regular Basis  
368-369 
Re-................... to Grade 17 or Above Posts 
386 
Re-................... to Posts and Selection Board 
386 
Re-................... to Posts Within the Purview of Selection Board 
692 
Receiving 
or 
Soliciting 
Direct 
Offers 
of 
................... 
from 
Private 
Firms/Organizations 
587 
Short-Term ...................s and Direct ...................s to Higher Secretariat Posts-under 
the Present Orders 
692-693 
Standard Terms and Conditions of Contract ...................s – Case of Retired Civil 
Servants, Retired Officers of the Armed Forces, Retired Judges of Superior Courts 
370-371 

Page-980                 ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)             
INDEX 
 
 
Standard Terms and Conditions of Contract ...................s – Case of Retired 
Civil Servants, Retired Officers of the Armed Forces, Retired Judges of 
Superior Courts 
371 
Standard Terms and Conditions of Contract ...................s – Case of Retired 
Civil Servants, Retired Officers of the Armed Forces, Retired Judges of 
Superior Courts 
371-372 
Submission of Summaries Regarding Ad-Hoc ...................s 
384-385 
Verification of Antecedents on First ................... 
348-356 
............... of an Inquiry Officer under the Government Servants (Efficiency and 
Discipline) Rules, 1973 
817-818 
Consultation with FPSC in Matters of ............... 
258-259 
Armed Forces  
 
Application of Instructions for Induction/Re-employment of ................... Officers 
to Autonomous Bodies 
297 
Application of Instructions for Induction/Re-employment of …………… Officers 
in Autonomous Bodies – Amendment in Recruitment Rules 
302 
Employment of ................... Officers/Personnel – Provisions in Recruitment Rules 
289 
Employment of Released/Retired ................... Officers/ Personnel in Civil Posts 
288-289 
Extension in Re-employment on Contract of ................... Officers 
305 
Guidelines for Re-employment of Retired ................... Officers 
297-298 
Induction of …………… Officers in Pakistan Administrative Service, Police 
Service of Pakistan and Foreign Service of Pakistan BS-17 
307 
Inclusion of Commissioned Service in ................. in Length of Service in Civil 
Posts 
299 
Induction of ................... Officers in Civil Posts – Modification in Instructions 
304-305 
Induction/Re-employment of ................... Officers in Civil Posts – Specification of 
Groups and Cadres 
302-303 
Induction/Re-employment of .......................... Officers in Civil Posts : 
Specification of Groups 
303-304 
Induction/Re-Employment Of ................... Officers into Civil Posts 
306-307 
Induction/Re-employment of Officers of ................... of Pakistan in Civil Posts 
293-297 
Pay Fixation and Seniority of ................... Officers Inducted in Civil Posts 
300 
Pay Fixation of ................... Officers Inducted in Civil Posts 
301 
Provision 
of 
Government-Owned 
or 
Hired 
Residence 
to 
Persons 
.......................... on Contract 
457-458 
Re-Employment of Retired ................... Officers in Civil in Specified Service 
Groups/Ministries through Defence Services Officers Selection Board (DSOSB) 
307 
Reservation of 50% Vacancies in BPS 1-3 and in BPS 4 of Staff Car Driver/ 
Despatch Rider for ................... Personnel 
291-292 
Resignation by ................... Officers Inducted in Civil Posts 
301 
Secondment/Re-Employment of ……………. Officers in Civil 
 
299-300 

 INDEX                  ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)               
Page-981 
 
 
Standard Terms and Conditions of Contract Appointments – Case of Retired Civil 
Servants, Retired Officers of the ..........., Retired Judges of Superior Courts 
370-371 
Standard Terms and Conditions of Contract Appointments – Case of Retired 
Civil Servants, Retired Officers of the ..................., Retired Judges of Superior 
Courts 
371 
Standard Terms and Conditions of Contract Appointments – Case of Retired 
Civil Servants, Retired Officers of the ..................., Retired Judges of Superior 
Courts 
371-372 
Submission of Returns in Respect of Employment of Released/ Retired 
................... Personnel 
292 
Termination of Contract of …………… Officers in Civil Posts 
301-302 
Assistance Package 
 
......................... for Families of Government Employees Who Die in Service 
418-419 
......................... for Families of Government Employees Who Die in Service 
419-424 
......................... for Families of Government Employees Who Die in Service 
425 
......................... for Families of Government Employees Who Die in Service 
425 
......................... for Families of Government Employees Who Die in Service 
425-426 
Revision of ...................... for Families of Government Employees Who Die in 
Service 
426-430 
Revision of ......................... for Families of Government Employees Who Die 
in Service 
430-431 
Revision of ........................ for Families of Government Employees Who Die in 
Service 
431 
Revision of ......................... for Families of Government Employees Who Die 
in Service 
431-432 
Revision of ......................... for Families of Government Employees Who Die 
in Service 
432 
Revision of ......................... for Families of Government Employees Who Die 
in Service 
432 
Revision of ......................... for Families of Government Employees Who Die 
in Service 
432-433 
Revision of ......................... for Families of Government Employees Who Die 
in Service (For Shuhda of ICT Police) 
433-437 
Appointment on Employees Son Quota Under Prime Minister‟s ......................... 437-438 
Revision of ......................... for Families of Government Employees Who Die 
in Service (For Shuhda of ANF Personnel) 
438-441 
Association (s) 
 
............... with Private Trusts, Foundations, etc. 
782 
Bar Against Public Criticism of Government Action By ...............s etc. 
795 
Channel of Communication Between Recognized Service ...............s and 
Government 
796 
Continuation of Service ............... Other Than Those of Services Regularly 
Constituted 
794 

Page-982                 ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)             
INDEX 
 
 
Demands of Service ...........................s 
795-796 
Functioning of Service ...............s 
794 
Grant of Interview to the Office Bearers of the ............... 
795 
Membership of Foreign Cultural ...............s/Organizations 
784 
Membership of Private ...............s Connected  with Social Work 
782 
Participation in Foreign Cultural ...............s or Organizations 
784 
Permission to Representatives of Service ...............s to Attend Various 
Meetings 
795 
Supply of Copies of Government‟s Orders/Instructions to the Employees 
...............s 
793-794 
Autonomous/Semi-Autonomous Bodies 
 
Government Policy in Regard to ........................ Established through 
Resolutions 
459 
Nomination of Officers of ............................... Equivalent to BS-18,BS-19 & BS-
20 for MCMC, SMC & NMC 
724 
Policy Guidelines for Contract Appointments for Posts in ..................., 
Corporations, Public Sector Companies etc. Owned and Managed by the 
Federal Government 
367-368 
Procedure Regarding Appointment in ..................., Under the Federal 
Government 
459-462 
Authority 
 
Appropriate ................... for Forwarding of Applications Through Proper Channel 
552 
Approval of Competent ................... and Assumption of Charge 
399 
Expeditious Processing of Cases Where the Medical ................... Certified That 
a Government Servant is Permanently Incapacitated For Service 
506 
Ruling Regarding Employees from Provinces/................... on Deputation to 
Federation 
579 
Requirement to Issue a Fresh Show Cause Notice if the Penalty Imposed Under 
Government Servants (Efficiency And Discipline) Rules, 1973, or Proposed to 
be Imposed is Greater than that Specified in the Show Cause Notice, or is 
Proposed to be Enhanced by the Appellate ................... 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
819-820 

 INDEX                  ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)               
Page-983 
 
 
B 
 
Basic Pay Scale (BPS) 
 
Continuance of the Practice of Notifying All Appointments in ...................16 or 
Above in the Gazette 
399 
Eligibility of Major/Equivalent Retired on Medical Grounds for Induction in Posts 
in ...................18/Equivalent 
300 
Method and Conditions of Appointment to Posts in ..............4 and Below 
345-348 
Mode of Notifying Appointments, Promotions etc., after Introduction of  the 
Scheme of................... 
396-398 
Post in ...................18 Which Carry Special Pay 
676 
Preparation of Seniority Lists ...................Wise 
617-619 
Promotion Related Capacity Building of Civil Servants in ...................17 to 
...................19 of Various Occupational Groups/Services 
708-720 
Recruitment Rules for the Posts of Private Secretary (BPS 17) to the 
Secretaries/ Additional Secretaries and Other Officers in ...................21/22 
Provided with the Services of P.S in the Federal Government 
121-122 
Recruitment to Posts in ...................16 and Above 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
550 

Page-984                 ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)             
INDEX 
 
 
C 
 
Cadre 
 
Civil Service of Pakistan (Composition and ...................) Rules, 1954 
16-22 
Merger of the ...................s of Urdu and English Typist/Stenotypist/ Stenographer 
for Purposes of Seniority, Promotion etc. 
627-628 
Procedure for Grant of Leave to High Officials and to the Officers Belonging to 
Groups/Services/.................................s 
Controlled 
by 
the 
Establishment 
Division 
490 
Reversion to Parent Group/................... 
935 
Case (s) 
 
…………s to be Submitted to the Prime Minister for his Orders 
462 
Check List of Information/ Material in ...........s to be Submitted to the 
Establishment Minister 
390-395 
Clarification Regarding Quantification of Part PERs in ............. of Incomplete 
Record 
633-636 
Consideration of ...................s by Central Selection Board – Furnishing of Full 
Particulars of Candidates for Promotion 
692 
Expeditious Processing of ...................s Where the Medical Authority Certified 
That a Government Servant is Permanently Incapacitated For Service 
506 
Grant of Leave to Government Servants for the Period Spent in Giving Evidence 
Otherwise than on Behalf of the State in a Criminal/Civil................... Not 
Connected with their Official Duties 
491 
Determination of Length of Service in ……… of Repeaters 
82 
Determination of Length of Service in ……… of Repeaters 
84 
Determination of Length of Service in ……… of Repeaters 
84-85 
Instructions to Regulate ...................s of Transfers/Deputation of Staff from One 
Office to Another 
566-570 
Manner of Submission of ...................s to the Establishment Minister 
389-390 
Procedure for Processing of ...................s of Resignation of Officers 
940 
Procedure for Referring ...................s to the Selection Board 
691-692 
Procedure for Submission of ...................s to S.S.B 
589-590 
Proforma Promotions – Review of ...................s 
697-698 
Re-employment Beyond Superannuation in Unavoidable ...................s 
919 
Standard Terms and Conditions of Contract Appointments – ............ of Retired 
Civil Servants, Retired Officers of the Armed Forces, Retired Judges of 
Superior Courts 
370-371 
Standard Terms and Conditions of Contract Appointments – ……... of Retired 
Civil Servants, Retired Officers of the Armed Forces, Retired Judges of 
Superior Courts 
371 
Standard Terms and Conditions of Contract Appointments – .......... of Retired Civil 
Servants, Retired Officers of the Armed Forces, Retired Judges of Superior Courts 
371-372 

 INDEX                  ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)               
Page-985 
 
 
Admissibility of TA to Witness in Disciplinary ...............(s) 
826-827 
Consideration of ...............(s) of Government Servants who Have Filed Civil Suits 
955 
Defence of ...............(s) in the Tribunal and Law Courts 
968-970 
Disciplinary Procedure to be Followed in ...............(s) Where No Inquiry 
Officer/ Committee is Appointed 
818-819 
Disciplinary Proceedings under Government Servants (Efficiency and 
Discipline) Rules, 1973 against Accused Government Servants: Furnishing of 
............... Material 
815-816 
Instructions Regarding Investigations by the Federal Investigation Agency into 
...............(s) of Bribery and Corruption 
841-845 
Procedure for Obtaining Orders of the President or Prime Minister in 
Disciplinary ...............(s) 
816-817 
Scope of Departmental Proceedings under the Efficiency and Discipline Rules 
in ...............(s) Referred to the Courts 
827-828 
Setting up of Anti-Corruption Council at the Centre to Deal with ...............(s) of 
Class I Officers 
851-852 
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for Disposal of ……..s of Deputation Under 
Wedlock Policy 
526-527 
Validity Period of Waiting/Reserved Merit List for  Making Alternate 
Nominations  in the  …………. of Recruitment by Selection 
264 
Validity Period of Waiting/Reserved Merit List for Making Alternate 
Nomination(s) in the General Recruitment ………….. 
264 
Casual Leave 
 
See “Leave” 
 
Central Selection Board 
 
Consideration of Cases by...................– Furnishing of Full Particulars of 
Candidates for Promotion 
692 
Guidelines 
for 
Submission 
of 
Proposals 
for 
Consideration 
of 
the................................. 
691 
Meetings of the................................. 
694 
Proposals for..................................– Prescribed Forms and Check List (March, 
1990) 
678-680 
Change 
 
................... in Requisition for Recruitment Placed with the FPSC 
545 
................... in Terms and Conditions of Deputationists 
579 
…………. of Occupational Groups/Services 
90 
................... of Occupational Group Prohibition Against Mutual Exchange 
90 
Withdrawal or ……….......... of Requisition by the Administrative Ministries/ 
Divisions/Departments for Posts Already Advertised by the Commission 
263-264 
Charge 
 
Additional ................... Appointment : Procedure and Remuneration 
379-380 
Appointment of Officers on Current .......................... Against Higher Posts and 
Payment of Additional Remuneration Therefor 
376-377 

Page-986                 ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)             
INDEX 
 
 
Guidelines for Appointment of Officers on Current …………. Against Higher 
Post and Payment of Additional Remuneration Therefor 
377-378 
Approval of Competent Authority and Assumption of ................... 
399 
Clarification About the Look after ………. 
382 
Clarification Regarding Length of Service for Current ................... 
374 
Combination of ................../Additional ................... Appointment Not to Be 
Notified 
380 
Correct Designation of Officers Holding Current ................... of Higher Posts 
376 
Current .............. Appointment – Determination of Seniority Within an 
Organization 
375 
Current/Additional ................... and Acting ................... Appointments 
373-374 
................... Report by Officers Proceeding on Transfer 
537 
Enhancement of Special Pay Admissible to an Officer Appointed to Hold Current 
................... of a Higher Post 
374 
Extension in Current ................... Appointment 
375-376 
Framing of an Additional ...............During Currency of the Disciplinary 
Proceedings 
827 
Publication of ...............(s) Sheet or Show Cause Notice in Newspaper 
821-822 
Unauthorized Assignment of the …………… of the Posts of Secretary/ 
Additional Secretary/Head of Departments /Organizations 
462 
Checking 
 
.......................... the Genuineness of Educational Certificates/ Qualifications etc. 
108 
Chief Guests 
 
Prohibition to be ........................... 
760 
Civil Servants 
 
Annual Medical Examination Reports-Fitness of a ................... for Posting, 
Training and Retention in Service 
724 
………….. (Efficiency & Discipline) Rules,2020 
805-815 
…………. Act, 1973 (Act No. LXXI of 1973) 
317-327 
…………….. (Directory Retirement from Service) Rules, 2020 
941-944 
……………. Promotion (BPS-18 to BPS-21) Rules,2019 
636-667 
................ (Promotion to the Post of Secretary BS-22 and Equivalent) 
Rules,2010   
630-632 
Counting of Service Rendered Against Higher Post Under Section 10 of the 
................... Act, 1973 
673-674 
................... (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 1973 
327-336 
................... (Confirmation) Rules, 1993 
336-339 
……………. (Service in International Organization) Rules,2016 
603-607 
................... (Seniority) Rules, 1993 
 
620-622 

 INDEX                  ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)               
Page-987 
 
 
Composition of Departmental Selection Board (DSB) for Promotion of Federal 
…………….. from BS-18 to BS-19 
677-678 
Permanent Absorption of .......................... of the Devolved Ministries/ Divisions/ 
Departments/ Organizations 
622-624 
Permission to Seek Private Employment by ................... During LPR Within 
Two Years of Retirement 
487-488 
Permission to Seek Private Employment by ................... During LPR Within 
Two Years of Retirement 
921-922 
Policy Concerning Promotion of ................... on Deputation Abroad 
597-598 
Policy Governing ................... on Deputation Abroad 
598-599 
Promotion Related Capacity Building of ................... in BPS 17 to BPS 19 of 
Various Occupational Groups/Services 
708-720 
Quota Consideration Regarding Permanent Absorption of ........................... of the 
Devolved Ministries/Divisions/ Departments/ Organizations 
624 
Re-employment of .......................... After Compulsory Retirement or Termination 
of Service 
918 
Special Instructions Relevant  to Leave of ...................: Absence from 
Headquarters  
489 
Standard Terms and Conditions of Contract Appointments – Case of Retired 
............, Retired Officers of the Armed Forces, Retired Judges of Superior 
Courts  
370-371 
Standard Terms and Conditions of Contract Appointments – Case of Retired 
............, Retired Officers of the Armed Forces, Retired Judges of Superior 
Courts 
371 
Standard Terms and Conditions of Contract Appointments – Case of Retired 
..................., Retired Officers of the Armed Forces, Retired Judges of Superior 
Courts 
371-372 
Terms and Conditions of Deputation of ...................  
560 
Terms and Conditions of Deputation of ................... to Foreign Service in Pakistan 
566 
Terms and Conditions of Deputation of ................... 
562-565 
The ................... (Validation of Rules) Ordinance, 2001 
8 
Appeals/Petitions/Representations by the ..................... Addressed to the Prime 
Minister 
954 
Applicability of the Disciplinary Proceedings against Dismissed, Removed or 
Compulsorily Retired ............... 
816 
............... (Appeal) Rules, 1977 
949-952 
Permission to Seek Private Employment by ............... During LPR and within 
Two Years of Retirement 
487-488 
Permission to Seek Private Employment by ............... During LPR and within 
Two Years of Retirement 
921-922 
Withholding of Appeals Under the ............... (Appeal) Rules, 1977 
954-955 

Page-988                 ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)             
INDEX 
 
 
Civil Suits 
 
Consideration of Cases of Government Servants who Have Filed ................... 
955 
Clarification 
 
................... About Deputation Allowance 
571 
……………. About the Look after Charge 
382 
............................ on Protection of Pay of Gazetted Contract Employees on 
Regularization/Appointment on Regular Basis 
372 
................... Regarding General Relaxation of 5 Years in Upper Age Limit 
Prescribed in Recruitment Rules 
359-361 
…………….. Regarding Provincial/Regional Quotas for Recruitment to the Civil 
Posts under the Federal Government 
125 
…………… Regarding Occupational Groups and Services (Probation, Training 
and Seniority) Rules,1990 
22-23 
................... Regarding Length of Service for Current Charge 
374 
................... Regarding Quantification of Part PERs in Case of Incomplete 
Record 
633-636 
...................s Regarding Application of Revised Provincial/ Regional Quotas 
130 
................... Regarding Revision of policy for Grant of BS-21 and BS-22 to 
Technical and Professional officers on the basis of Meritorious Services 
726-727 
....................... 
of 
Withdrawal 
of 
Request 
of 
LPR/Retirement 
After 
Sanction/Notification 
483-484 
............... of Application of Instructions Regarding Radio Broadcasts to 
Employees of Autonomous Bodies 
790-791 
............... Regarding Detention of Government Servants Under Public Safety 
Act 
837 
............... Regarding Option of Seeking Pre-mature Retirement 
894-895 
Encashment of L.P.R (..........................) 
486 
Further ...................of Withdrawal of Request of LPR/Retirement After 
Sanction/Notification 
484 
Committee 
 
Evidence Before ............... of the National Assembly 
790 
Reinstatement of Government Servants on Court Decision and Functions of 
Enquiry ............... 
833-835 
Revised Guidelines for the FR-17(I) .................../High Level Committee to 
Consider the Cases of Proforma Promotion on the Basis of Antedated Seniority 
699-702 
Commerce and Trade Group 
 
Framework of Rules and Procedure applicable to.......................... 
24-26 
Competitive Examination 
 
...................s/Selections Held by FPSC – Applications of Departmental Candidates 
553 
General Instructions for Submission of Applications for Various Posts- 
...................-Number of Chances for Government Servants who are in Grade-16 
and Below 
550-551 

 INDEX                  ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)               
Page-989 
 
 
Condition 
 
Federal Public Service Commission (Composition and ............... of  Service) 
Regulations, 1978 
251-256 
Conduct 
 
Appointment by Transfer in Office Management Group (OMG) (…………… of 
examination) Rules,2020 
196-218 
Future Good ...................of Pensioners 
777-778 
Delegation of Powers to Secretaries to Government  under the Government 
Servants (...............) Rules, 1964 
753 
Government Servants (..............) Rules, 1964 
743-753 
Instructions under Government Servants (…………) Rules, 1964 Regarding 
Procedure for Engaging in Private Business, Trade and Consultancy Work 
779 
Interpretation of the term “Government” as Defined in the Government 
Servants (...................) Rules, 1964 
753-754 
Loss of Security Passes to be Treated as „Mis...............‟  
831-832 
Marriage or Promise of Marriage with Foreign National (Except Indian) to be 
Considered `Mis...............‟ 
803 
Officers‟ Duty to Watch ................... of Their Subordinates 
830 
Confidential 
 
Bar Against Mentioning of Unfinalised Departmental Proceedings in 
................... Reports 
825-826 
Confirmation 
 
Civil Servants (...................) Rules, 1993 
336-339 
................... of Deputationists by Borrowing Offices 
576 
Procedure for ................... of Deputationists 
575-576 
Constitution 
 
………...........al Provisions 
5-8 
Consultancy  
 
………………… Assignments 
597 
Contract Appointment 
 
See “Contract Appointment” in “Appointment”  
 
Corporation 
 
Amendments in Government Servants Conduct Rules, 1964 And Submission of 
Declaration of Income and Assets Held and Acquired By Government Servants 
and ............... Employees 
770 
Corruption 
 
Anti-............... Measures – Government Servants to Disclose Their 
Assets/Severe Disciplinary Action for Indulging in Corrupt Practices 
840 
Instructions Regarding Investigations by the Federal Investigation Agency into 
Cases of Bribery and ............... 
841-845 
Responsibility of Head of Department for ............... in Department 
830-831 

Page-990                 ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)             
INDEX 
 
 
Responsibility of Head of Department for.......................Within Area of his 
Administrative Jurisdiction 
840-841 
Court (s) 
 
Standard Terms and Conditions of Contract Appointments – Case of Retired 
Civil Servants, Retired Officers of the Armed Forces, Retired Judges of 
Superior ...................s 
370-371 
Standard Terms and Conditions of Contract Appointments – Case of Retired 
Civil Servants, Retired Officers of the Armed Forces, Retired Judges of 
Superior ...................s 
 
371 
Standard Terms and Conditions of Contract Appointments – Case of Retired 
Civil Servants, Retired Officers of the Armed Forces, Retired Judges of 
Superior ...................s 
371-372 
Defence of Cases in the Tribunal and Law ...............s 
968-970 
Grant of Arrears of Pay and Allowances to Government Servants for Period of 
Absence from Duty, On Re-Instatement as a Result of ...............‟s Decisions 
833 
Grant of Arrears of Pay and Allowances to Govt. Servants for Period of 
Absence from Duty, on Reinstatement as a Result of ...............‟s Decision 
836 
Letter of Attorney General of Pakistan Regarding Implementation of Orders of 
the Federal Service Tribunal and High ...............s Appealed Against in Supreme 
...............of Pakistan 
970 
Reinstatement of Government Servants on ............... Decision and Functions of 
Enquiry Committee 
833-835 
Removal  From  Service as  a  Result  of  Conviction in ............... of  Law 
838-839 
Scope of Departmental Proceedings under the Efficiency and Discipline Rules 
in Cases Referred to the ...............s 
827-828 
Strictures Passed by ...............s Against Government Servants 
839 
Criteria 
 
Raising of Subscription for Funds – Regulatory ............... 
760-761 
Curb Extraneous  
 
Steps to .............................. Influences 
789 
Current Charge 
 
Appointment of Officers on ................... Against Higher Posts and Payment of 
Additional Remuneration Therefor 
376-377 
Guidelines for Appointment of Officers on ………… Against Higher Post and 
Payment of Additional Remuneration Therefor 
377-378 
Clarification Regarding Length of Service for ................... 
374 
Correct Designation of Officers Holding ................... of Higher Posts 
376 
................... Appointment – Determination of Seniority Within an Organization 
375 
Enhancement of Special Pay Admissible to an Officer Appointed to Hold 
................... of a Higher Post 
374 

 INDEX                  ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)               
Page-991 
 
 
D 
 
Declaration 
 
Amendments in Government Servants Conduct Rules, 1964 And Submission of 
............... of Income and Assets Held and Acquired By Government Servants 
and Corporation Employees 
770 
............... of Assets Held and Acquired by Government Servants and 
Corporation Employees 
765-769 
……………….. of Assets Held and Acquired by Government Servants for the 
year ending 30th June, 20__ 
771-775 
Departmental Promotion Committee 
 
Constitutions and Functions of the................... 
307-308 
...................Can Interview Candidates 
677 
...................Not Competent to Recommend Demotion 
676-677 
...................not Concerned with Demotions/Reversions 
936 
Minutes of the................... 
677 
Setting-Up of the ...................s for Promotion to Posts Upto and Including BPS 18 
675 
Deployment of Police  
 
................................. Personnel in UN Missions 
608-609 
Deputation 
 
Bar Against Allowing Officers to Go on ................... Against Lower Posts 
582-583 
Bar Against the Use of the Term “................... Allowance” 
571-572 
Change in Terms and Conditions of …………….ists 
579 
Clarification About ................... Allowance 
571 
Instructions to Regulate Cases of Transfers/................... of Staff from One Office 
to Another 
566-570 
Clearance for Posting Abroad or on ................... 
591 
Confirmation of …………..ists by Borrowing Offices 
576 
Delegation of Powers in Regard to ................... of Government Servants 
556-557 
Decision on Leave, or ………….. or for any other Purpose out of Cadre Position 
581 
................... Abroad Beyond Five Years and Placement in Static List 
600-601 
................... Against Pakistani Posts Abroad – Proposal for Replacement 
595 
................... Against Pakistani Posts Abroad 
595 
................... Not a Method of Appointment 
560-561 
................... of Defence Officers in Civil : Requisition by Name 
602 
................... of Government Servants – Normal Period of ................... and 
Extension 
559-560 
................... of Government Servants – Period of ................... 
554-556 
................... of Government Servants – Procedure for Extension 
561-562 

Page-992                 ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)             
INDEX 
 
 
................... of Government Servants 
557 
................... of Officers/Staff in Gilgit Baltistan of the Federation/ Provinces and 
Vice Versa 
581 
................... of Pakistanis in International Organisations as Short-Term Consultant 
596 
................... of Section Officers Against Other Posts 
577-578 
................... Period – Absorption of ...................ists 
557-559 
………………….ists from Provincial Governments 
578-579 
Explanation of the Term “...................” 
554 
Extension in ................... – Decision by Special Selection Board 
594 
Extension in the ................... of Officers Posted in Pakistan Missions Abroad 
594 
General Conditions Regarding Postings, Transfers and ...................-F.R. 15 
515 
Grant of ................... Allowance 
570-571 
Option of Premature Retirement by ...................ists Abroad 
594 
Policy Concerning Promotion of Civil Servants on ................... Abroad 
597-598 
Policy Governing Civil Servants on ……….. Abroad 
598-599 
Posting on …………… 
581 
Recovery of Leave Salary and Pension Contribution in Respect of Federal 
Government Employees on ................... to Foreign Service within Pakistan or 
Abroad 
584-585 
Reversion of ...................ists to Parent Departments 
698-699 
Reversion of ...................ists 
572-575 
Ruling Regarding Employees from Provinces/Authority on ................. to 
Federation 
579 
SOPs For Recalling  of Officers posted on ................... against Pakistan‟s Positions 
Abroad 
595-596 
Terms and Conditions of ................. of Civil Servants to Foreign Service in 
Pakistan 
566 
Terms and Conditions of ................... of Civil Servants 
560 
Terms and Conditions of ................... of Civil Servants 
562-565 
Vacancies Caused by ................... of Officers Abroad 
400-401 
Determination 
 
…………………. of Domicile 
147 
……………… of Domicile for the Purpose of Appointments Against 
Provincial/Regional Quotas 
147-149 
………………… of Seniority/Length of Service of All Occupational Groups 
and Services 
80 
…………………of Inter-se-Seniority of Officers of All Occupational Groups 
81 
……………….of Inter-se-Seniority of Officers of All Occupational Groups 
and Services 
81-82 
………….…… of Length of Service in Case of Repeaters 
82 
………….…… of Inter-se-Seniority of Officers of All Occupational Groups 
and Services 
82-83 

 INDEX                  ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)               
Page-993 
 
 
………….…… of Inter-se-Seniority of Probationers of All Occupational 
Groups and Services who Repeat Their CTP Due to Unsatisfactory 
Performance 
84 
………….…… of Length of Service in Case of Repeaters 
84 
………….…… of Length of Service in Case of Repeaters 
84-85 
………….…… of Inter-se-Seniority when Specialized Training Programme 
(STP) is Deferred/repeated 
85-86 
Married Female Candidates – ……………. of Domicile 
149-150 
T. A. for Journey on Retirement– …………….. of Home Town 
912 
Diplomatic Status 
 
.......................... to Civilian Officers of Other Ministries/ Divisions Posted in 
Pakistan Missions Abroad 
538 
Discipline  
 
Civil Servants (Efficiency and ...............) Rules, 2020 
805-815 
Departmental/Disciplinary Proceeding(s), Procedure Action: 
 
Acceptance of Resignation During Pendency of...................,  
937-938 
Applicability of the ................... against Dismissed, Removed or Compulsorily 
Retired Civil Servants 
816 
Bar Against Use of Government Stationery and Service Postage Stamps by 
Accused Government Servants in................... 
823 
................... under Government Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 
1973 against Accused Government Servants: Furnishing of Case Material 
815-816 
................... Procedure to be Followed in Cases Where No Inquiry Officer/ 
Committee is Appointed 
818-819 
Framing of an Additional Charge During Currency of the................... 
827 
Implications of Release of a Government Servant under Section 25 of 
Ordinance No. XVIII of 1999 for................... 
895-896 
Quick Disposal of...................  Pending against Government Servants who are 
about to Superannuate 
829 
Scope of Departmental ...................(s) under the Efficiency and Discipline 
Rules in Cases Referred to the Courts 
827-828 
Domicile 
 
Candidates Not Required to Show Place of Birth of their Fathers for Purposes 
of ................... 
150 
Change of ................... After Entry into Government Service 
150 
Determination of ................... for the Purpose of Appointments Against 
Provincial/Regional Quotas 
147-149 
Determination of ................... 
147 
Married Female Candidates – Determination of ................... 
 
149-150 

Page-994                 ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)             
INDEX 
 
 
Drawal of Reward  
 
.......................s, Remuneration and Other Concessions Not Specifically Sanctioned 583-584 
Drinking Parties 
 
Participation of Government Servants in ............... 
830 
Duty 
 
Absence from ................... Without Leave 
 
Bar Against Leaving Place of ................... Without Waiting for Sanction of 
Leave 
489 
Procedure for Creation of Posts of Officer on Special ................... (O.S.D.) and 
Making Appointments Thereto 
401-403 
Recall to ................... After Premature Retirement 
 
Grant of Arrears of Pay and Allowances to Government Servants for Period of 
Absence from ..................., On Re-Instatement as a Result of Court‟s Decisions 
833 
Grant of Arrears of Pay and Allowances to Govt. Servants for Period of 
Absence from ..............., on Reinstatement as a Result of Court‟s Decision 
836 
Officers‟ ............... to Watch Conduct of Their Subordinates 
830 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 INDEX                  ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)               
Page-995 
 
 
E 
 
Educational Certificates 
 
Checking the Genuineness of ………......................../ Qualifications etc. 
108 
Educational Institution 
 
Prosecution of Studies by Government Servants in the ..........................s 
782 
Educational Qualifications 
 
False or Forged Information about ............... and Age and Pakistan Penal Code 839-840 
Efficiency and Discipline 
 
Appointment of an Inquiry Officer under the Government Servants (...............) 
Rules, 1973 
817-818 
Civil Servants (……………………) Rules,2020 
805-815 
Disciplinary Proceedings under Government Servants (...............) Rules, 1973 
against Accused Government Servants: Furnishing of Case Material 
815-816 
Employment/Re-employment of Persons Penalized Under the Government 
Servants (...................) Rules, 1973 and the Removal From Service (Special 
Powers) Ordinance, 2000 
896 
Grant of Leave to Government Servants Compulsorily Retired from Service 
under the Government Servants (...............) Rules 
832 
Need of Keeping the Provisions of FR-29 in View While Imposing the Penalty 
Under Rule 4(1)(b)(i) of the Government Servants (.......................) Rules,1973 
818 
Requirement to Issue a Fresh Show Cause Notice if the Penalty Imposed Under 
Government Servants (...............) Rules, 1973, or Proposed to be Imposed is 
Greater than that Specified in the Show Cause Notice, or is Proposed to be 
Enhanced by the Appellate Authority 
819-820 
Scope of Departmental Proceedings under the ............... Rules in Cases 
Referred to the Courts 
827-828 
Employee(s) 
 
Appointment of Provincial Government ...................s Against BPS 17 and Above 
Posts Under the Federal Government 
580-581 
C.S.R. 436. Notice of Discharge on the Abolition of Post to Permanent 
...................s 
933 
Recovery of Leave Salary and Pension Contribution in Respect of Federal 
Government .....................s on Deputation to Foreign Service within Pakistan or 
Abroad 
584-585 
Ruling Regarding ...................s from Provinces/Authority on Deputation to 
Federation 
579 
Declaration of Assets Held and Acquired by Government Servants and 
Corporation ...............s 
765-769 
Amendments in Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964 And Submission 
of Declaration of Income and Assets Held and Acquired By Government 
Servants and Corporation ...............s 
770 

Page-996                 ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)             
INDEX 
 
 
Clarification of Application of Instructions Regarding Radio Broadcasts to 
...............s of Autonomous Bodies 
790-791 
Supply of Copies of Government Orders/Instructions to the ..........................s 
Associations 
793-794 
Bar Against Acceptance of Gratification by Grade 1-3 ..................s on 
Occasions of Eid etc. from Public 
758 
Employment 
 
Application of Instructions for Induction/Re-................... of Armed Forces Officers 
to Autonomous Bodies 
297 
Application of Instructions for Induction/Re-……………… of Armed Forces 
Officers in Autonomous Bodies – Amendment in Recruitment Rules 
302 
Cabinet Decision Regarding Re-................... 
919 
................... of Armed Forces Officers/Personnel – Provisions in Recruitment 
Rules 
289 
................... of Ex-Servicemen and Pakistan Armed Services Board (PASB) 
290-291 
................... of Ex-Servicemen from Other Regions if Locally Not Available 
292 
................... of Government Servants with NGOs or Private Organizations 
within Pakistan 
506 
................... of Government Servants with International Organizations, Foreign 
Governments on the Basis of Leave DUE/EOL 
492 
................... of Released/Retired Armed Forces Officers/ Personnel in Civil Posts 
288-289 
Ex-Government 
Servants 
(......................... 
with 
Foreign 
Governments) 
(Prohibition) Act,1966 (Act No. XII of 1966) 
923-924 
Extension in Re-................... on Contract of Armed Forces Officers 
305 
Grant of Allowances During Re-.................../Contractual Appointment 
927-928 
Guard Against Unauthorised Overstayal after Superannuation/on Expiry of the 
Period of Contract Re-................... 
920-921 
Induction/Re-................... of Armed Forces Officers in Civil Posts – Specification 
of Groups and Cadres 
302-303 
Induction/Re-................... of Armed Forces Officers in Civil Posts : Specification 
of Groups 
303-304 
Induction/Re-................... Of Armed Forces Officers into Civil Posts 
306-307 
Induction/Re-................... of Officers of Armed Forces of Pakistan in Civil Posts 
293-297 
Leave Salary Admissible During Re-................... 
932 
Maximum Period of ................... Abroad 
593 
Permission to Seek Private ................... by Civil Servants During LPR Within 
Two Years of Retirement 
487-488 
Permission to Seek Private ................... by Civil Servants During LPR Within 
Two Years of Retirement 
921-922 
Posting of Married Female Government 
Servants 
at the Place of 
Residence/Posting of Their Husbands Who are Not in Government ................... 
525-526 
Production of Certificate of Physical Fitness by Retired  Government Servants on 
Re-................... to Gazetted Posts 
924-925 

 INDEX                  ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)               
Page-997 
 
 
Re-................... – Pay Fixation 
930 
Re-................... after Superannuation by Corporations/Autonomous Bodies 
918-919 
Re-................... and Medical Examination 
925-926 
Re-................... Beyond Superannuation in Unavoidable Cases 
919 
Re-................... During Refused L.P.R 
918 
Re-................... of Civil Servants After Compulsory Retirement or Termination of 
Service 
918 
Re-................... of Consultant After the Age of Superannuation 
404 
Re-................... of Retired Armed Forces Officers in Civil in Specified Service 
Groups/Ministries through Defence Services Officers Selection Board (DSOSB) 
307 
Recognition of Defence/Staff Colleges Qualifications as Equivalent to University 
Degree for Government ................... 
357 
Request for Re-................... by Officers Retired Voluntarily  
921 
Reservation of 10% Quota for ................... of Women Across-the-Board in Federal 
Government Services 
126-127 
Reservation of 05% Quota for …….……………… of Minorities (Non-
Muslims) Across-the-Board in Federal Government Services/ Jobs 
127-128 
Submission of Returns in Respect of ................... of Released/ Retired Armed 
Forces Personnel 
292 
Time Limit for Availing of the Concession of Travelling Allowance After 
Retirement – Admissibility in Re-................... in Government 
913 
Use of Military Ranks by Military Personnel and Designation of Civil ................... 
288 
............... of Dependent Family Members of a Government Servant in Foreign 
Missions in Pakistan 
778 
................... /Re-................... of Persons Penalized Under the Government 
Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 1973 and the Removal From 
Service (Special Powers) Ordinance, 2000 
896 
Permission to Seek Private ............... by Civil Servants During LPR and within 
Two Years of Retirement 
487-488 
Permission to Seek Private ............... by Civil Servants During LPR and within 
Two Years of Retirement 
921-922 
Employment abroad 
 
Maximum Period of....................... 
593 
Encashment  
 
.......................... of LPR on Premature Retirement 
485-486 
Option for .......................... of LPR 
484-485 
.......................... of LPR/Amendment in the Revised Leave Rules 1980 in 
Respect of Leave ......................./Grant of ................... of LPR for 365 Days 
Instead of 180 Days 
486-487 
Establishment Division 
Procedure for Grant of Leave to High Officials and to the Officers Belonging to 
Groups/Services/Cadres Controlled by the ................... 
490 

Page-998                 ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)             
INDEX 
 
 
Establishment Minister 
 
Check List of Information/ Material in Cases to be Submitted to the................... 
390-395 
Manner of Submission of Cases to the....................... 
389-390 
Ex-Government Servant(s) 
 
...................................... Employed by UN Agencies 
924 
...................................... Servants (Employment with Foreign Governments) 
(Prohibition)Act,1966 (Act No. XII of 1966) 
923-924 
Extension 
 
Ad-Hoc Appointments and Approval for ................... 
384 
Deputation of Government Servants – Normal Period of Deputation and 
................... 
559-560 
Deputation of Government Servants – Procedure for ................... 
561-562 
................... in Current Charge Appointment 
375-376 
................... in Deputation – Decision by Special Selection Board 
594 
................... in the Deputation of Officers Posted in Pakistan Missions Abroad 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
594 

 INDEX                  ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)               
Page-999 
 
 
F 
 
Family Members 
 
Employment of Dependent .......................... of a Government Servant in 
Foreign Missions in Pakistan 
778 
Size of ................... of Serving Personnel Selected for Secondment Abroad 
599 
Size of ........................... of Serving Personnel Selected For Secondment 
Abroad 
600 
Size of .......................... for Secondment Abroad 
600 
Farewell Parties 
 
Holding of ................... on the Occasion of Transfers of Government Servants 
in their Honour 
759 
Federal Government 
 
Convention Between the ........................... and the Provincial Governments „Inter-
Se’ Regarding Terms and Conditions of Deputationists 
580 
Federal Investigation Agency (FIA) 
 
........................... Act 1974 (Act VIII of 1975) 
845-850 
Co-operation with Investigating Officers of the ........................... 
841 
Correspondence with the ................... 
852 
Instructions Regarding Investigations by the .................................. into Cases of 
Bribery and Corruption 
841-845 
Federal Public Service Commission 
 
Change in Requisition for Recruitment Placed with the................... 
545 
Channel of Communication Between the Ministries, Departments, etc. and 
the...................  
796 
Competitive Examinations/Selections Held by...................– Applications of 
Departmental Candidates 
553 
Consultation with ...................in Matters of Appointment  
258-259 
Consultation with ...................in Respect of Recruitment Rules  
121 
Consultation with ...................in Respect of Recruitment Rules  
259 
Extension in the Period of Contract Appointments for Posts Outside the 
Purview of................... 
369-370 
...................(Composition and Condition of  Service) Regulations, 1978  
251-256 
...................(Functions) Rules, 1978  
257-258 
...................Ordinance, 1977  
246-251 
Framing of Recruitment Rules : Consultation With................... 
121 
Grant of Starting Salary to Candidates after Selection by the................... 
549-550 
Initial Training of the Probationers appointed to various Groups/Services on the 
Results of the Annual Competitive Examination held by the................... 
90-92 
Modifications in Requisitions Placed with................... 
 
544-545 

Page-1000                 ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)             
INDEX 
 
 
Nomination of Departmental Representatives to Assist the ...................at the 
Interviews for Various Posts 
260-261 
Practice of Withholding/Forwarding of Applications of Departmental Candidates 
to................... 
553 
Procedure for Rejection of the Advice of the ……………. 
260 
Revised Requisition Form for Direct- Recruitment Through the.................. 
545-549 
Supply of Character Rolls to the................... 
260 
Variation between views of Departmental Representatives at the Interview and 
...................‟s Advertisements for Various Posts  
261-262 
Withdrawal or Change of Requisition by the Administrative Ministries/ 
Divisions/Departments for Posts Already Advertised by the................... 
263-264 
Fixation 
 
................... of „inter-se‟-Seniority of Section Officers appointed by direct 
recruitment 
88 
................... of Pay and Allowances of Re-employed Government Servants – 
Principles for ................... of Pay 
926-927 
................... of Pay of Retired Government Servants Civil/Military 
Re-employed Under the Government and in Autonomous Bodies 
928-929 
Foreign 
 
Benefit of Promotion in Parent Cadre while in ................... Service 
583 
Employment of Government Servants with International Organizations, 
................... Governments on the Basis of Leave DUE/EOL 
492 
Ex-Government 
Servants 
(Employment 
with 
................... 
Governments) 
(Prohibition)Act,1966 (Act No. XII of 1966) 
923-924 
Induction of Armed Forces Officers in Pakistan Administrative Service, Police 
Service of Pakistan and ………… Service of Pakistan BS-17 
307 
Publicity of Vacancies in International Agencies, ................... Governments and 
Private Organizations 
602 
Recoveries of Dues from Government Servants in ................... Exchange  
586 
Recovery of Leave Salary and Pension Contribution in Respect of Federal 
Government Employees on Deputation to ................... Service within Pakistan or 
Abroad 
584-585 
Terms and Conditions of Deputation of Civil Servants to ................... Service in 
Pakistan 
566 
Acceptance of ................... Trips Sponsored By Commercial Firms 
758-759 
Acceptance of ................... Awards by Government Servants 
759 
Employment of Dependent Family Members of a Government Servant in 
................... Missions in Pakistan 
778 
Participation in ................... Cultural Associations or Organizations 
784 
Membership of ................... Cultural Associations/Organizations 
784 
Approaching ................... Missions and Aid Giving Agencies By Officers to 
Secure Invitation to Visit a ................... Country or to Elicit Offers of Training 
Facilities 
797 

 INDEX                  ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)               
Page-1001 
 
 
Correspondence with ................... Missions 
797 
Fraternisation Between Government Servants and the ................... Missions in 
Pakistan 
798-799 
Government Servants (Marriage with ................... Nationals) Rules, 1962  
800-803 
Marriage or Promise of Marriage with ................... Nationals (Except Indian) to 
be Considered `Misconduct‟ 
803 
Observance of Government Servants (Marriage with ................... Nationals) 
Rules, 1962 and Guidelines 
803 
Bar Against Making Requests for Ex-Post Facto Approval for Marriages with 
................... Nationals 
804 
Policy Guidelines for …………. Appointments and Postings in Pakistan Missions 
Abroad and Against Pakistan‟s Seats in International, Multilateral, Bilateral and 
Regional Organizations, FORA and Bodies 
533-534 
Forms 
 
Explanatory Instructions for Filling-up the Leave Account ...................  
482-483 
Issuance of revised PER ................... 
633 
Proposal for Central Selection Board – Revised ...................s (March, 1999) 
681-690 
Proposals for Central Selection Board – Prescribed ...................s and Check List 
(March, 1990) 
678-680 
Revised 
Requisition 
................. 
for 
Direct-Recruitment 
Through 
the 
Commission 
545-549 
Function (s) 
 
Constitutions 
and 
...............................of 
the 
Departmental 
Promotion 
Committees 
307-308 
Raising of Subscriptions for ...............s, etc. 
760 
Reinstatement of Government Servants on Court Decision and .......................s 
of Enquiry Committee 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
833-835 

Page-1002                 ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)             
INDEX 
 
 
G 
 
Gift(s) 
 
Bar Against Demanding Dowry and Acceptance of ....................on Occasions 
of Marriages 
757-758 
Grant 
 
Casual Leave – ................... of Maximum Leave at a Time 
500 
...........................of BPS-17 to the Superintendent (BPS-16) in the Federal 
Government Ministries/Divisions/Attached Departments/Subordinate Offices 
674-675 
…………..…of Current Charge of the Post of Section Officer to Superintendents/ 
Assistants in Ministries/Divisions 
376 
................... of Allowances During Re-employment/Contractual Appointment 
927-928 
................... of Casual Leave ex-Pakistan 
503 
................... of Casual Leave to Government Servants Deputed Abroad 
504 
............... of Casual Leave to Heads of Departments and Subordinate Offices 
502-503 
................... of Casual Leave at a time 
501 
................... of Deputation Allowance 
570-571 
................... of Extraordinary Leave (Leave Without Pay) Under Rule 9 of the 
Revised Leave Rules,1980 
491 
................... of Leave to Government Servants for the Period Spent in Giving 
Evidence Otherwise than on Behalf of the State in a Criminal/Civil Case Not 
Connected with their Official Duties,  
491 
................... of Leave to Officers in BPS-22 other than Secretaries and Heads of 
Departments in BPS-22 
504 
................... of Leave to Officers Transferred to Other Posts 
491 
................... of Leave to Secretaries, Head of Departments and Heads of 
Autonomous Bodies 
505-506 
................... of Leave to Transferred Officers 
537 
………. of Leave and Notification of Transferred Officers 
537 
................... of Special Leave to „Khuddam-ul-Hajjaj‟ 
493 
................... of Starting Salary to Candidates after Selection by the Federal 
Public Service Commission 
549-550 
................... of Medical Allowance to Civil Pensioners of the Federal Government  907-908 
................... of Medical Allowance to Civil Employees/Pensioners of the Federal 
Government 
908-909 
................... of Medical Allowance to Civil Pensioners of the Federal Government 909-910 
............... of BS-21 and BS-22 to Technical/Professional Officers on Account of 
Meritorious Services 
725-726 
....................... of BS-21 to Technical and Professional Officers on Account of 
Meritorious Service 
727-732 
Clarification Regarding Revision of policy for ............... of BS-21 and BS-22 to 
Technical and Professional officers on the basis of Meritorious Services 
726-727 

 INDEX                  ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)               
Page-1003 
 
 
Procedure for ................... of Leave to High Officials and to the Officers 
Belonging to Groups/Services/Cadres Controlled by the Establishment Division 
490 
Revision of Transfer ..................., Transportation of Motorcar/Motorcycle/ Scooter 
and Mileage Allowance 
914-915 
................... of Study Leave Outside Pakistan 
496 
............... of Interview to the Office Bearers of the Association 
795 
............... of Leave to Government Servants Compulsorily Retired from Service 
under the Government Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules 
832 
............... of Permission for Acquisition of Property (Movable and Immovable) 
by Government Servants 
761-762 
.............. of Leave to Secretaries, Heads of Departments and Heads of 
Autonomous/Semi-Autonomous Bodies/Corporations 
504-505 
Permissions ...............ed by the Provincial Governments to the Officers of All 
Pakistan Services/Federal Government Officers 
923 
Procedure for .............. of Leave To High Officials And To The Officers 
Belonging To Groups/Services/ Cadres Controlled by the Establishment 
Division 
490 
 
Quarterly Statement Regarding Permissions ...............ed to the Federal 
Government Officers Under Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964 by 
the Provincial Government to Buy and Sell Assets  
776 
Guideline (s) 
 
…………….for Appointment of Officers on Current Charge Against Higher 
Post and Payment of Additional Remuneration Therefor 
377-378 
...................s for Appointment of Consultants – Designing of a Proforma 
408-410 
...................s for Appointment of Consultants 
405-408 
...................s for Appointment on Contract Basis 
365-367 
...................s for Selection of the Officers for Posting Abroad in Pakistan Missions 518-519 
...........................s for Re-employment of Retired Armed Forces Officers 
297-298 
...................s for Submission of Proposals for Consideration of the Central 
Selection Board (CSB) 
691 
Operational ...................s for the Administration of Surplus Pool 
625-626 
Modified …………… for Disposal of Federal Government Employees in the 
Surplus Pool 
626-627 
Policy ...................s for Contract Appointments for Posts in Autonomous/Semi-
Autonomous Bodies, Corporations, Public Sector Companies etc. Owned and 
Managed by the Federal Government 
367-368 
Policy ...................s for Postings/Transfers of Officers 
515-516 
Revised ...........................s for the FR-17(I) Committee/High Level Committee to 
Consider the Cases of Proforma Promotion on the Basis of Antedated Seniority 
699-702 
...................s for Submission of Appeals/Representations to the Chief 
Executive/ President 
952-953 
Observance of Government Servants (Marriage with Foreign Nationals) Rules, 
1962 and ...............s 
803 
Policy ……………s for Foreign Appointments and Postings in Pakistan Missions 
Abroad and Against Pakistan‟s Seats in International, Multilateral, Bilateral and 
Regional Organizations, FORA and Bodies 
533-534 

Page-1004                 ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)             
INDEX 
 
 
 
I 
 
Implementation 
 
Letter of Attorney General of Pakistan Regarding ............... of Orders of the 
Federal Service Tribunal and High Courts Appealed Against in Supreme Court 
of Pakistan 
970 
Increment (s) 
 
 
Counting of Period of Formal Promotion Towards ................... on Reversion to Parent 
Office 
576 
Inland Revenue Service  
 
……........................ 
28-30 
Tax Administration Reforms: Reorganization of Federal Board of Revenue – 
creation of new occupational service namely .............................. 
30-33 
Induction 
 
Application of Instructions for ……………/Re-employment of Armed Forces 
Officers in Autonomous Bodies – Amendment in Recruitment Rules 
302 
................... of Armed Forces Officers in Civil Posts – Modification in Instructions 304-305 
.................../Re-employment of Armed Forces Officers in Civil Posts – 
Specification of Groups and Cadres 
302-303 
.................../Re-employment of Armed Forces Officers in Civil Posts : 
Specification of Groups 
303-304 
.................../Re-Employment Of Armed Forces Officers into Civil Posts 
306-307 
.................../Re-employment of Officers of Armed Forces of Pakistan in Civil 
Posts 
293-297 
.......................... in Secretariat Group as Deputy Secretary (BS-19) 
265-269 
.......................... in Secretariat Group as Joint Secretary (BS-20) 
269-282 
Application of Instructions for .................../Re-employment of Armed Forces 
Officers to Autonomous Bodies 
297 
Eligibility of Major/Equivalent Retired on Medical Grounds for ................... in 
Posts in BPS 18/Equivalent 
300 
…………… of Armed Forces Officers in Pakistan Administrative Service, 
Police Service of Pakistan and Foreign Service of Pakistan BS-17 
307 
Information Group 
 
………….................... 
42-47 
Inquiry 
 
Appointment of an ........................... Officer under the Government Servants 
(Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 1973 
817-818 
Disciplinary Procedure to be Followed in Cases Where No ........................... 
Officer/ Committee is Appointed 
 
818-819 

 INDEX                  ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)               
Page-1005 
 
 
T.A. Admissible to Witnesses and Accused Government Servant Summoned by 
an ........................... Officer 
826 
Inquiry Officer 
Appointment of an ........................... under the Government Servants 
(Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 1973 
817-818 
T.A. Admissible to Witnesses and Accused Government Servant Summoned by 
an ........................... 
826 
Institution(s) 
 
Bar Against Naming of.......................s, Projects, Roads, Streets etc. in the 
Country after the Names of Government Servants 
783-784 
Prosecution 
of 
Studies 
by 
Government 
Servants 
in 
the 
Educational....................... 
782 
Uniform …………….s on 2% Disability Quota 
146 
Insurance Business 
 
Transaction of ...................by Government Servants 
777 
Introduction 
 
Mode of Notifying Appointments, Promotions etc., after ................... of  the 
Scheme of Basic Pay Scales 
396-398 
Refixation of Pay After ................... of Revised National Pay Scales 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
930-932 

Page-1006                 ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)             
INDEX 
 
 
J 
 
Job Description  
 
Circulation of .......................... 
588 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 INDEX                  ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)               
Page-1007 
 
 
L 
 
Law 
 
Defence of Cases in the Tribunal and ...................Courts 
968-970 
Removal  From  Service as  a  Result  of  Conviction in Court of  ................... 
838-839 
Study Leave for L.L.M. (Shariah and ...............) Courses of Islamic University 
Islamabad 
496 
Leave 
 
Absence from Duty Without ................... 
940 
Absence from Office Due to Curfew to be Treated as Casual ................... 
503 
Bar Against Leaving Place of Duty Without Waiting for Sanction of 
................... 
489 
Casual ................... – Grant of Maximum ................... at a Time 
500 
Combination of Casual ................... with Holidays 
501 
Decision on …………, or Deputation or for any other Purpose out of Cadre 
Position 
581 
Grant of EOL Without Pay and Conversion of EOL Into Another Kind of 
Leave 
492 
Employment of Government Servants with International Organizations, 
Foreign Governments on the Basis of ................... DUE/EOL 
492 
Explanatory Instructions for Filling-up the ................... Account Form  
482-483 
Grant of ………. to Transferred Officers 
537 
Grant of ................... and Notification of Transferred Officers 
537 
Grant of ................... to Government Servants for the Period Spent in Giving 
Evidence Otherwise than on Behalf of the State in a Criminal/Civil Case Not 
Connected with their Official Duties 
491 
Grant of ................... to Officers in BPS-22 other than Secretaries and Heads of 
Departments in BPS-22 
504 
Grant of ................... to Officers Transferred to Other Posts 
491 
Grant of ................... to Secretaries, Heads of Departments and Heads of 
Autonomous Bodies 
505-506 
Grant of ................... to Secretaries, Heads of Departments and Heads of 
Autonomous/Semi-Autonomous Bodies/Corporations 
504-505 
Grant of Casual ................... ex-Pakistan 
503 
Grant of Casual ................... to Government Servants Deputed Abroad 
504 
Grant of Casual ................... to Heads of Departments and Subordinate Offices 
502-503 
Grant of Casual ................... at a Time 
500-501 
Grant of Extraordinary ................... (................... Without Pay) Under Rule 9 of 
the Revised ................... Rules, 1980 
491 
Grant of Special ................... to „Khuddam-ul-Hajjaj‟ 
493 

Page-1008                 ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)             
INDEX 
 
 
................... and Training Reserve 
495-496 
................... Reserve Section 
494 
................... Reserve under the Section Officers‟ Scheme and its Proper Utilization 493-494 
................... Salary Admissible During Re-employment 
932 
Leaving Headquarters During Holidays or Casual ................... 
489 
Procedure for Grant of ................... to High Officials and to the Officers 
Belonging to Groups/ Services/Cadres Controlled by the Establishment 
Division 
490 
Procedure for Grant of Casual ................... to Secretaries 
502 
Procedure for Grant of Casual ................... to the Secretaries to the Government 
and Heads of Departments 
502-503 
Procedure for Recovery of ................... Salary and Pension Contributions 
585-586 
Recovery of ................... Salary and Pension Contribution in Respect of Federal 
Government Employees on Deputation to Foreign Service within Pakistan or 
Abroad 
584-585 
Revised ................... Rules, 1980 
467-481 
Sanction and Notification of ................... of Officers Transferred to Other Posts 
491 
Special Instructions Relevant  to ................... of Civil Servants: Absence from 
Headquarters  
489 
Spreading of Casual ................... Over Two Years 
501 
Grant of Study ................... Outside Pakistan 
496 
Study...............for L.L.M. (Shariah and Law) Courses of Islamic University 
Islamabad 
496 
Study ................... Rules Prescribed by  the President (F.R. 84) 
497-500 
Utilization of ................... Reserve Section 
494-495 
Grant of ............... to Government Servants Compulsorily Retired from Service 
under the Government Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules 
832 
Leave Preparatory to Retirement (L.P.R) 
 
Arrangements for providing substitutes for officers proceeding on ................... 
489 
Clarification of Withdrawal of Request of .................../Retirement After 
Sanction/Notification 
483-484 
Further Clarification of Withdrawal of Request of .................../Retirement After 
Sanction/Notification 
484 
Option for Encashment of ................... 
484-485 
Encashment of ………………… on Premature Retirement 
485-486 
Encashment of ................... 
486 
Encashment of ...............(Clarification) 
486 
Encashment of .................../Amendment in the Revised Leave Rules 1980 in 
Respect of Leave Encashment/Grant of Encashment of .............. for 365 Days 
Instead of 180 Days 
486-487 

 INDEX                  ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)               
Page-1009 
 
 
Filling-up of Vacancies on Proceeding of Section Officers on ………………. 
495 
Promotion of an Officer/Official During …………….. 
703 
Re-employment During Refused ……………. 
918 
Letters to Editor 
 
................... 
787 
Length 
 
................... of Service for Promotion from BPS-16 to BPS-18 Where There is 
No Intermediate Post in BPS-17 
674 
Minimum ................... of Service for Eligibility for Promotion to Posts in Various 
BPS 
671-672 
Possession of Prescribed Minimum ................... of Service does not Confer a Right 
to Promotion Over Senior Persons 
674 
Lien 
 
.......................... of Government Servants – Objective and Administrative 
Implications 
575 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page-1010                 ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)             
INDEX 
 
 
M 
 
Management Position Scale 
 
……………………. Policy,2020 
442-452 
Marriage 
 
Bar Against Demanding Dowry and Acceptance of Gifts on Occasions of 
...............s 
757-758 
Bar Against Making Requests for Ex-Post Facto Approval for ...............s with 
Foreign Nationals 
804 
............... or Promise of ............... with Foreign National (Except Indian) to be 
Considered `Misconduct‟ 
803 
Observance of Government Servants (............... with Foreign Nationals) Rules, 
1962 and Guidelines 
803 
Prohibition of Wasteful Expenditure on ...............s 
804 
Measures 
 
Anti-Corruption ................... s – Government Servants to Disclose Their 
Assets/Severe Disciplinary Action for Indulging in Corrupt Practices 
840 
...............s to Curb Extraneous Influences by Government Servants in Service 
Matters 
789 
Mechanism  
 
..................to Ensure Merit Based Recruitment in the Ministries/ Divisions/Sub-
ordinate 
Offices/Autonomous/ 
Semi-Autonomous 
Bodies/ 
Corporations/ 
Companies/ Authorities  
103-105 
Medical or Medical Facilities 
 
Annual .................. Examination Reports-Fitness of a Civil Servant for Posting, 
Training and Retention in Service 
724 
Eligibility of Major/Equivalent Retired on ...............Grounds for Induction in Posts 
in BPS-18/ Equivalent 
300 
Expeditious Processing of Cases Where a ….….....................Authority 
Certified That a Government Servant is Permanently Incapacitated For Service 
506 
Private ................... Practice by Government Servant 
776 
Membership 
 
.......................... of British Library 
784 
.................................. of Foreign Cultural Associations/Organizations 
784 
.............................. of Private Associations Connected  with Social Work 
782 
Meritorious Service(s) 
 
Grant of BS-21 and BS-22 to Technical/Professional Officers on Account of 
..............................s 
725-726 
Clarification Regarding Revision of policy for Grant of BS-21 and BS-22 to 
Technical and Professional officers on the basis of ..........................s 
 
726-727 

 INDEX                  ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)               
Page-1011 
 
 
Grant of BS-21 to Technical and Professional Officers on Account of 
....................... 
727-732 
MP-I Scale 
 
Placement of Members in MP-I Scale 
968 
Placement of Retired Judicial Officers in MP-I Scale 
968 
Method (s) 
 
Deputation Not a ...................of Appointment 
 
Detailed Recruitment Rules Not Necessary Only ...................of Appointment, 
Qualifications, Experience etc. to be Notified 
118-120 
...................and Conditions of Appointment to Posts in BPS 4 and Below 
 
Military Lands and Cantonments Group 
 
Framework of Rules and Procedure applicable to ................................. 
47-49 
Military Ranks 
 
Use of...................by Military Personnel and Designation of Civil Employment 
 
Minister(s) 
 
Appeals/Petitions/Representations by the Civil Servants Addressed to the Prime 
............... 
954 
Approaches to ...............s, M.N.As. etc. for Purchase or Sale of Property 
788 
Indulging in Critical Remarks Against ...............s 
799 
Procedure for Obtaining Orders of the President or Prime …................. in 
Disciplinary Cases 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
816-817 

Page-1012                 ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)             
INDEX 
 
 
N 
 
National Assembly 
 
Evidence Before Committee of the ....................... 
790 
Nomination 
 
Criteria for ……………. of Officers to National Management College/National 
Institute of Management (NIMs) 
721-723 
................................. of Officers of Autonomous/Semi-Autonomous Bodies 
Equivalent to BS-18,BS-19 & BS-20 for MCMC, SMC & NMC 
724 
................... of Departmental Representatives to Assist the Commission at the 
Interviews for Various Posts 
260-261 
Revision of ..............................s for NMC,NS&WC,SMC and MCMC 
629 
Validity Period of Waiting/Reserved Merit List for  Making Alternate 
…………………s in the  Cases of Recruitment by Selection 
264 
Validity Period of Waiting/Reserved Merit List for Making Alternate 
………………..(s) in the General Recruitment Cases 
264 
Submission of Panels for ……………. by the Prime Minister 
405 
Notification, Notifying 
 
Continuance of the Practice of ...................All Appointments in BPS 16 or Above 
in the Gazette 
399 
...................Regarding Postings, Transfers etc. of Officers of the Status of Joint 
Secretary and Above 
387-388 
...................Retirement of an Officer on Attaining the Age of Superannuation 
907 
Notice 
 
Adequate Circulation of Vacancy ................... – View of Special Selection Board 
587 
C.S.R. 436. ................... of Discharge on the Abolition of Post to Permanent 
Employees 
933 
Circulation of Vacancy ...................s 
588 
Publication of ...............s in the Newspapers 
820-821 
Publication of Charge Sheet or Show Cause ...................  in Newspaper 
821-822 
Requirement to Issue a Fresh Show Cause ............... if the Penalty Imposed 
Under Government Servants (Efficiency And Discipline) Rules, 1973, or 
Proposed to be Imposed is Greater than that Specified in the Show Cause 
..............., or is Proposed to be Enhanced by the Appellate Authority 
 
 
 
 
 
819-820 

 INDEX                  ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)               
Page-1013 
 
 
O 
Occupational Groups 
 
Clarification Regarding …………………… and Services (Probation, Training 
and Seniority) Rules,1990 
22-23 
Change of ………………/Services 
90 
Change of ...................Prohibition Against Mutual Exchange 
90 
Determination of Inter-se-Seniority of Officers of All ……………………… 
and Services 
82-83 
Determination of Seniority/Length of Service of All ………………. and 
Services 
80 
...................and Services (Probation, Training and Seniority) Rules, 1990 
75-79 
Promotion Related Capacity Building of Civil Servants in BPS 17 to BPS 19 of 
Various .................../Services 
708-720 
Determination of Inter-se-Seniority of Officers of All …………………..and 
Services 
81-82 
Determination of Inter-se-Seniority of Probationers of All …………………….. 
and Services who Repeat Their CTP Due to Unsatisfactory Performance 
84 
……………………... and Services (Final Passing Out Examination) Rules, 
2003 
79-80 
Seniority of Officers and ...................After Administrative Reforms 
619-620 
Official Document 
 
Unauthorized Communication of ...................s or Information 
785 
Officer on Special Duty 
 
Procedure for Creation of Posts of..............................and Making Appointments 
Thereto 
401-403 
Office Management Group 
 
............................... 
49-53 
Order (s) 
 
Names of the Selected Persons to be Arranged in the.............. of Seniority 
677 
Implementation of Transfer ………..s of Officers 
535 
Letter of Attorney General of Pakistan Regarding Implementation of ...............s 
of the Federal Service Tribunal and High Courts Appealed Against in Supreme 
Court of Pakistan 
970 
Supply of Copies of Government‟s ...............s/Instructions to the Employees 
Associations 
793-794 
Ordinance 
 
Employment/Re-employment of Persons Penalized Under the Government 
Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 1973 and the Removal From 
Service (Special Powers) ..................., 2000  
896 
Federal Public Service Commission..................., 1977 
246-251 

Page-1014                 ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)             
INDEX 
 
 
Implications of Release of a Government Servant under Section 25 of 
................... No. XVIII of 1999 for Disciplinary Proceedings 
895-896 
National Accountability ................... No.XVIII of 1999 
853-893 
The Civil Servants (Validation of Rules) ..................., 2001 
8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 INDEX                  ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)               
Page-1015 
 
 
P 
Pakistan Audit and Accounts Service 
 
............................................ 
53-57 
Pakistan Administrative Service  
 
....................................... 
33-36 
Pakistan Customs Service 
 
……….............................. 
26-28 
Pay 
 
Clarification on Protection of …………. of Gazetted Contract Employees on 
Regularization/Appointment on Regular Basis 
372 
Enhancement of Special ....................... Admissible to an Officer Appointed to 
Hold Current Charge of a Higher Post 
374 
Fixation of ....................... and Allowances of Re-employed Government 
Servants – Principles for Fixation of ....................... 
926-927 
Fixation of ....................... of Retired Government Servants Civil/Military 
Re-employed Under the Government and in Autonomous Bodies 
928-929 
Post in BPS 18 Which Carry Special ....................... 
676 
Principle of Equivalence – Defence Services and National ....................... 
Scales 
929-930 
Grant of Arrears of ............... and Allowances to Govt. Servants for Period of 
Absence from Duty, on Reinstatement as a Result of Court‟s Decision 
833 
Grant of Arrears of ............... and Allowances to Govt. Servants for Period of 
Absence from Duty, on Reinstatement as a Result of Court‟s Decision 
836 
Pay Scale (s) 
 
Mode of Notifying Appointments, Promotions etc., after Introduction of  the 
Scheme of Basic .......................s 
396-398 
Principle of Equivalence – Defence Services and National .......................s 
929-930 
Refixation of Pay After Introduction of Revised National .......................s 
930-932 
Penalty 
 
Imposition of ....................... for Specific Period 
935 
Requirement to Issue a Fresh Show Cause Notice if the ............... Imposed 
Under Government Servants (Efficiency And Discipline) Rules, 1973, or 
Proposed to be Imposed is Greater than that Specified in the Show Cause 
Notice, or is Proposed to be Enhanced by the Appellate Authority 
819-820 
Performance Evaluation Reports or PER 
 
Clarification Regarding Quantification of Part .....................in Case of 
Incomplete Record 
633-636 
Issuance of revised ............... Forms 
633 

Page-1016                 ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)             
INDEX 
 
 
Equivalence of ...................Grading in Defence and Civilian Organization 
629 
Permanent Absorption 
 
........................of 
Civil 
Servants 
of 
the 
Devolved 
Ministries/Divisions/Departments/ Organizations 
622-624 
Quota Consideration Regarding ................................. of Civil Servants of the 
Devolved Ministries/Divisions/ Departments/ Organizations 
624 
Petition 
 
Appeals/.......................s/Representations by the Civil Servants Addressed to the 
Prime Minister 
954 
Forwarding of Advance Copies of the Appeals/Representations/ ...................s 
etc. 
953 
Use of Intemperate and Inappropriate Language in Representations and 
...................s of Government Servants 
832 
Physical Fitness 
 
....................... 
348 
Production of Certificate of ....................... by Retired  Government Servants on 
Re-employment to Gazetted Posts 
924-925 
Politics 
 
Taking Part in ....................... by Pensioners 
778 
Action to be Taken Against Government Servants Found Indulging in 
.............../Subversive Activities 
791-792 
Bar Against Discussing ............... in Offices, Clubs, Restaurants and Public 
Places 
792-793 
Taking Part in ............... - Bar against Supporting Student Agitations 
791 
Police Service of Pakistan 
 
Framework of Rules and Procedure applicable to ....................... 
57-68 
Induction of Armed Forces Officers in Pakistan Administrative Service, 
……………………… and Foreign Service of Pakistan BS-17 
307 
Post (s) 
 
Amendment in the Recruitment Rules of Civil .......................s 
336 
Application of Section Officers for Ex-Cadre .......................s 
576-577 
Appointment of Officers on Current Charge Against Higher .......................s 
and Payment of Additional Remuneration Therefor 
376-377 
Guidelines for Appointment of Officers on Current Charge Against Higher 
…………… and Payment of Additional Remuneration Therefor 
377-378 
Appointment of Provincial Government Employees Against Grade 17 and 
Above .......................s Under the Federal Government 
580-581 
Bar Against Allowing Officers to Go on Deputation Against Lower 
.......................s 
582-583 
Bar Against Revising Qualifications Prescribed for the .......................s in the 
Recruitment Rules 
124 

 INDEX                  ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)               
Page-1017 
 
 
Clarification Regarding Provincial/Regional Quotas for Recruitment to the Civil 
………..s under the Federal Government 
125 
C.S.R. 436. Notice of Discharge on the Abolition of ....................... to 
Permanent Employees 
933 
Correct Designation of Officers Holding Current Charge of Higher 
....................s 
376 
Counting of Service Rendered Against Higher .................................. Under 
Section 10 of the Civil Servants Act, 1973 
673-674 
Creation/Abolition of .......................s of Joint Secretary,  Deputy Secretary and 
Section Officers 
22 
Deputation Against Pakistani ......................s Abroad – Proposal for 
Replacement 
595 
Deputation Against Pakistani .......................s Abroad 
595 
Deputation of Section Officers Against Other .......................s 
577-578 
Eligibility of Major/Equivalent Retired on Medical Grounds for Induction in 
.......................s in BPS 18/Equivalent 
300 
Eligibility of Officers for Appointment in Secretariat .......................s 
265 
Employment 
of 
Ex-servicemen 
in 
Government 
Departments 
against 
..................s in BPS 1-4 
289-290 
Employment of Released/Retired Armed Forces Officers/ Personnel in Civil 
.......................s 
288-289 
Enhancement of Special Pay Admissible to an Officer Appointed to Hold 
Current Charge of a Higher ....................... 
374 
Extension in the Period of Contract Appointments for .......................s Outside 
the Purview of FPSC 
369-370 
Grant of Current Charge of the …………… of Section Officer to 
Superintendents/Assistants in Ministries/Divisions 
376 
Waiver of Framing of Recruitment Rules for Project ………………s in 
Ministries/ Divisions  
123 
General 
Instructions 
for 
Submission 
of 
Applications 
for 
Various 
.......................s- Competitive Examination-Number of Chances for Government 
Servants who are in Grade-16 and Below 
550-551 
Government Servants (Applications for Services and ....................s) Rules, 
1966 
540-542 
Grant of Leave to Officers Transferred to Other .......................s 
491 
Inclusion of Commissioned Service in Armed Forces in Length of Service in 
Civil .......................s 
299 
Indication of Date of Superannuation of Officers Proposed for Appointment to 
Tenure .......................s 
917-918 
Induction/Re-employment of Armed Forces Officers in Civil .......................s – 
Specification of Groups and Cadres 
302-303 
Induction/Re-employment of Armed Forces Officers in Civil .......................s : 
Specification of Groups 
303-304 

Page-1018                 ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)             
INDEX 
 
 
Induction/Re-Employment Of Armed Forces Officers into Civil .......................s 306-307 
Induction/Re-employment of Officers of Armed Forces of Pakistan in Civil 
.......................s 
293-297 
Initial Appointment to Civil .......................s (Relaxation of Upper Age Limit) 
Rules, 1993 
358-359 
Isolated .......................s – Application of Provincial/Regional Quotas 
130 
Length of Service for Promotion from BPS-16 to BPS-18 Where There is No 
Intermediate ….................... in BPS-17 
674 
Method and Conditions of Appointment to …....................s in BPS 4 and 
Below 
345-348 
Minimum Length of Service for Eligibility for Promotion to…....................s in 
Various BPS 
671-672 
Normal Tenure for an Officer on the Same Job/….................... 
517 
Other …....................s in the Federal Secretariat, Attached Departments and 
Subordinate Offices 
668 
Pay Fixation of Armed Forces Officers Inducted in Civil …....................s 
301 
Policy for Upgradation/Re-designation of …....................s 
412-413 
Policy Guidelines for Contract Appointments for …....................s in 
Autonomous/Semi-Autonomous 
Bodies, 
Corporations, 
Public 
Sector 
Companies etc. Owned and Managed by the Federal Government 
367-368 
Procedure for Creation of …....................s of Officer on Special Duty (O.S.D.) 
and Making Appointments Thereto 
401-403 
Production of Certificate of Physical Fitness by Retired  Government Servants 
on Re-employment to Gazetted …....................s 
 
Provisions Relating to Commissioned Officers and Other Ranks Recruited or 
Inducted on Regular Basis or on Contract in Civil …....................s- Terms and 
Conditions 
283-285 
Provision of Supporting Information/Documents with Draft Recruitment Rules 
for Obtaining Concurrence of Establishment Division or Framing /Amendment 
of Recruitment Rules and Up-gradation/Re-designation of ………….s 
115-118 
Reappointment to …....................s and Selection Board 
386 
Re-appointment to …....................s Within the Purview of Selection Board 
692 
Re-appointment to Grade 17 or Above …....................s 
386 
Reconstitution of Selection Board for …................s in Basic Pay Scale-19 
 
Recruitment of Candidates on a Pay Higher Than the Minimum Scale of the 
….................... 
543-544 
Recruitment Rules for the …....................s of Private Secretary (BPS 17) to the 
Secretaries/ Additional Secretaries and Other Officers in BPS 21/22 Provided 
with the Services of P.S in the Federal Government 
121-122 
Recruitment to …....................s in BPS 16 and Above 
550 
Recruitment to Civil …................s in the Administration of Gilgit Baltistan  
131 
Recruitment to the .......................s of Private Secretaries to the Federal 
Ministers and Ministers of State 
122 

 INDEX                  ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)               
Page-1019 
 
 
Resignation by Armed Forces Officers Inducted in Civil .......................s 
301 
Reversion of Probationers Undergoing Training at the Civil Services Academy 
to Their Former ....................... 
572 
Reversion to Lower Grade/....................... 
935 
Right of Government Servants to Apply for Higher ...................s in Other 
Offices 
551 
Sanction and Notification of Leave of Officers Transferred to Other 
...................s 
491 
Seeking Reversion to Lower ....................... for Posting Abroad 
521 
Setting-Up of the Departmental Promotion Committees for Promotion to 
.......................s Upto and Including BPS 18 
675 
Short-Term Appointments and Direct Appointments to Higher Secretariat 
.......................s-under the Present Orders 
692-693 
Unauthorized Assignment of the Charge of the …………….s of Secretary/ 
Additional Secretary/Head of Departments /Organizations 
462 
Upgradation of Ministerial Posts 
413-414 
Upgradation of Ministerial Posts 
415 
Upgradation of .......................s and Procedure for Filling-up of Upgraded 
.......................s 
411 
Updation/Revision of Recruitment Rules of Various ………..s of Ministries/ 
Divisions/Departments under the Federal Government    
106-107 
Upgradation of .......................s 
411-412 
Appointment to Upgraded ...............s 
415 
Upgradation of the ..............s of Stenotypist, Stenographer and Private 
Secretary 
415-416 
Upgradation/Re-designation of the ……….. 
417 
Re-designation of the ............... of Stenographer (BS-16) as Assistant Private 
Secretary (BS-16) 
416 
Bar Against Making Requests for Ex-............... Facto Approval for Marriages 
with Foreign Nationals 
804 
Criteria for Counting of Prescribed Length of Experience for Recruitment to 
Various ................... s 
262-263 
Nomination of Departmental Representatives to Assist the Commission at the 
Interviews for Various ...............s 
260-261 
Variation between views of Departmental Representatives at the Interview and 
Commission‟s Advertisements for Various ...............s 
261-262 
Withdrawal or Change of Requisition by the Administrative Ministries/ 
Divisions/Departments for ...............s Already Advertised by the Commission 
263-264 
Postal Group 
……….................... 
68-70 
Posting 
Authorities Empowered to Make ...............s and Transfers of Officers and Staff 
521 

Page-1020                 ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)             
INDEX 
 
 
Bar Against Asking Officers by Name for ............................... in Corporations/ 
Autonomous Bodies 
582 
Clearance for ....................... Abroad or on Deputation 
591 
General Conditions Regarding .......................s, Transfers and Deputation-F.R. 
15 
515 
Guidelines for Selection of the Officers for ............. Abroad in Pakistan 
Missions 
518-519 
Normal Tenure of ....................... 
516-517 
Notifications Regarding .......................s, Transfers etc. of Officers of the Status 
of Joint Secretary and Above 
387-388 
Policy Guidelines for .......................s/Transfers of Officers 
515-516 
....................... of Married Female Government Servants at the Place of 
Residence/....................... of Their Husbands Who are Not in Government 
Employment 
525-526 
…………… on Deputation 
581 
....................... of Serving Husband/Wife at the Same Station 
523-524 
....................... of Unmarried Female Government Servants at the Place of 
Residence of Parents/Family  
525-526 
.......................s and Transfers of Officers who hold the Status of Joint Secretary 
to the Federal Government 
522 
............... of Officers in Pakistan Missions Abroad 
517-518 
Policy Guidelines for Foreign Appointments and ………….s in Pakistan Missions 
Abroad and Against Pakistan‟s Seats in International, Multilateral, Bilateral and 
Regional Organizations, FORA and Bodies 
533-534 
……….. and Transfer of Officers 
535 
Seeking Reversion to Lower Post for ....................... Abroad 
521 
Posting abroad 
 
Clearance for ....................... or on Deputation 
591 
Guidelines for Selection of the Officers for ....................... in Pakistan Missions 518-519 
Seeking Reversion to Lower Post for ....................... 
521 
Power 
 
Delegation of .......................s in Regard to Deputation of Government Servants 556-557 
President 
 
Study Leave Rules Prescribed by  the ....................... (F.R. 84) 
497-500 
Guidelines for Submission of Appeals/Representations to the Chief 
Executive/............... 
952-953 
Procedure for Obtaining Orders of the ............... or Prime Minister in 
Disciplinary Cases 
816-817 
Press/Media 
 
Premature Leakage of Information to the ............... 
785 
Use of Social ………. by Government Servants 
 
780-781 

 INDEX                  ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)               
Page-1021 
 
 
Instructions under Government Servants (Conduct) Rules,1964 Regarding 
Procedure for Participating in Electronic, Print and Social ……… Platforms 
786 
Prison 
 
Committals to …….. – [CSR 194]  
836 
Private Candidates  
 
Appearing at an Examination as ..................................... by Government 
Servants 
782-783 
Private Work/Trade/Employment 
 
Engagement in..................., Business etc. By Spouses of Government Servants 
778-779 
........................... During and After Office Hours 
777 
Procedure 
 
Additional Charge Appointment : ....................... and Remuneration 
379-380 
Deputation of Government Servants – ....................... for Extension 
561-562 
Employment after Retirement- Policy and ...................................... – Re-
employment After Superannuation 
916-917 
Framework of Rules and ....................... applicable to Pakistan Customs Service  26-28 
Framework of Rules and ....................... applicable to Pakistan Administrative 
Service  
33-36 
Framework of Rules and ....................... applicable to Economists and Planners 
Group 
37-39 
Framework of Rules and ....................... applicable to Foreign Service of 
Pakistan 
40-42 
Framework of Rules and ....................... applicable to Inland Revenue Service  
28-30 
Framework of Rules and ....................... applicable to Information Group 
 
Framework of Rules and ....................... applicable to Military Lands and 
Cantonments Group 
47-49 
Framework of Rules and ....................... applicable to Office Management 
Group 
49-53 
Framework of Rules and ....................... applicable to Pakistan Audit and 
Accounts Service 
53-57 
Framework of Rules and ....................... applicable to Police Service of Pakistan 57-68 
Framework of Rules and ....................... applicable to Postal Group 
68-70 
Framework of Rules and ....................... applicable to Secretariat Group 
70-72 
Framework of Rules and ....................... applicable to Railways (Commercial & 
Transportation Group)  
72-74 
Instructions under Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964 Regarding 
………….. for Engaging in Private Business, Trade and Consultancy Work 
779 
Instructions under Government Servants (Conduct) Rules,1964 Regarding 
………….. for Participating in Electronic, Print and Social Media Platforms 
786 
....................... for Confirmation of Deputationists 
575-576 
....................... for Creation of Posts of Officer on Special Duty (O.S.D.) and 
Making Appointments Thereto 
401-403 

Page-1022                 ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)             
INDEX 
 
 
....................... for Deposit of Consultancy Fee 
597 
....................... for Grant of Casual Leave to Secretaries 
502 
....................... for Grant of Casual Leave to the Secretaries to the Government 
and Heads of Departments 
501-502 
....................... for Grant of Leave to High Officials and to the Officers 
Belonging to Groups/Services/Cadres Controlled by the Establishment Division 
490 
....................... for Making Recruitment from Abroad 
113 
....................... for Processing of Cases of Resignation of Officers 
940 
....................... for Recovery of Leave Salary and Pension Contributions 
585-586 
....................... for Referring Cases to the Selection Board 
691-692 
....................... for Selection of Candidates for Appointment in Pakistan 
Missions Abroad 
520 
....................... for Submission of Cases to S.S.B 
589-590 
….................... Regarding Appointment in Autonomous/Semi-Autonomous 
Bodies, Under the Federal Government 
459-462 
Upgradation of Posts and ….................... for Filling-up of Upgraded Posts 
411 
Disciplinary …............ to be Followed in Cases Where No Inquiry Officer/ 
Committee is Appointed 
818-819 
…............ for Obtaining Orders of the President or Prime Minister in 
Disciplinary Cases 
816-817 
…............ for Rejection of the Advice of the F.P.S.C. 
260 
…............ For the Acceptance and Disposal of Gifts 
754-757 
Selection ………………. Of Chief Executives in Key Public Sector Enterprises 109-112 
Standard Operating ………… (SOP) for Disposal of Cases of Deputation Under 
Wedlock Policy 
526-527 
The Service Tribunals (…................) Rules, 1974 
960-967 
Probation 
 
Initial Training of the …....................ers appointed to various Groups/Services 
on the Results of the Annual Competitive Examination held by the FPSC 
90-92 
Reversion of …....................ers Undergoing Training at the Civil Services 
Academy to Their Former Post 
572 
Section Officers‟ (…...................., Training and Seniority) Rules, 1964 
86-88 
Promotion  
 
Civil Servants …………… (BPS-18 to BPS-21) Rules,2019 
636-667 
Conditions for Appointment, …................ and Transfer Rules for Assistant 
Incharge, Stenotypist, Assistant, UDC and LDC 
340-342 
Conditions for Appointment,….................... and Transfer Rules for Private 
Secretary, Superintendent and Stenographer 
342-344 
Bar against ….................... of Ad-Hoc Appointees 
703 
Benefit of ….................... in Parent Cadre while in Foreign Service 
583 
Civil Servants (…........................ to the Post of Secretary BS-22 and 
Equivalent) Rules,2010   
630-632 

 INDEX                  ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)               
Page-1023 
 
 
Civil Servants (Appointment, ….................... and Transfer) Rules, 1973 
327-336 
Composition of Departmental Selection Board (DSB) for ………… of Federal 
Civil Servants from BS-18 to BS-19 
677-678 
Composition of Departmental …..................../Selection Committees 
676 
Consideration for ….................... of a Person on Transfer to Another Office 
697 
Consideration of Cases by Central Selection Board – Furnishing of Full 
Particulars of Candidates for ….................... 
692 
Constitutions and Functions of the Departmental ….................... Committees 
307-308 
Counting of Ad-Hoc Service for the Purpose of ….................... 
673 
Counting of Period of Formal ….................... Towards Increment on Reversion 
to Parent Office 
576 
Declining ….................... to Evade Transfer to an Unattractive Station 
733 
Departmental…..............Committee not Concerned with Demotions/Reversions 
936 
Eligibility of Superintendent (BS-17) to in Participate  Section Officers 
……………..al Examinations 
196 
Filling-up of Vacancies – Distribution According to Quota for …...................., 
Transfer and Direct Recruitment 
695 
General Instructions Regarding …....................s 
669-671 
Length of Service for ….................... from BPS-16 to BPS-18 Where There is 
No Intermediate Post in BPS-17 
674 
Merger of the Cadres of Urdu and English Typist/Stenotypist/ Stenographer for 
Purposes of Seniority, ….................... etc. 
627-628 
Minimum Length of Service for Eligibility for ….................... to Posts in 
Various BPS 
671-672 
Mode of Notifying Appointments, …....................s etc., after Introduction of 
the Scheme of Basic Pay Scales 
396-398 
Policy Concerning ….................... of Civil Servants on Deputation Abroad 
597-598 
Possession of Prescribed Minimum Length of Service does not Confer a Right 
to ….................... Over Senior Persons 
674 
Proforma …....................s – Review of Cases 
697-698 
Proforma …....................s 
696-697 
….................... of an Officer/Official During LPR 
703 
….................... on Temporary/Regular Basis 
702-703 
….................... Related Capacity Building of Civil Servants in BPS 17 to BPS 
19 of Various Occupational Groups/Services 
708-720 
…..................../Direct Recruitment Quota 
694 
Setting-Up of the Departmental ….................... Committees for ….................... 
to Posts Upto and Including BPS 18 
675 
Section Officer ……………..al Examination Rules,2015 
172-196 
Property 
 
Acquisition of Immovable …..........by Government Servants Posted/ Employed 
In Pakistan Missions Abroad 
764 

Page-1024                 ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)             
INDEX 
 
 
Approaches to Ministers, M.N.As. etc. for Purchase or Sale of …............ 
788 
Grant of Permission for Acquisition of …............ (Movable and Immovable) by 
Government Servants 
761-762 
Revision of Proforma for Permission Regarding Acquisition/Disposal/ 
Construction of Moveable/immovable …............ 
762-763 
Protection/Projection 
 
Consultation with Principal Information Officer for…....................... of 
Government Policies Programmes and Activities 
786-787 
Provincial Government (s) 
 
Appointment of ….................... Employees Against Grade 17 and Above Posts 
Under the Federal Government 
580-581 
Convention Between the Central Government and the …....................s ‘Inter-
Se’ Regarding Terms and Conditions of Deputationists 
580 
Deputationists from …....................s 
578-579 
Quarterly Statement Regarding Permissions Granted to the Federal 
Government Officers Under Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964 by 
the …............ to Buy and Sell Assets 
776 
Provincial/Regional Quota(s) 
 
Determination of Domicile for the Purpose of Appointments Against 
…....................s 
147-149 
Failure of the …....................s and Federal Ministries/Divisions to Inform the 
F.P.S.C. about Withholding of Application Within One Month of the Closing 
Date Not to Affect the Candidate‟s Selection/Appointment 
543 
Isolated Posts – Application of …....................s 
130 
Clarification Regarding …………………….. for Recruitment to the Civil Posts 
under the Federal Government 
125 
…....................s for Recruitment to the Civil Posts Under the Federal 
Government 
125 
Observance of …....................... Quota by Making Contract Appointment 
126 
Regulation of …....................s 
128-129 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 INDEX                  ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)               
Page-1025 
 
 
Q 
 
Queries 
 
…........................ About Review Exercise 
894 
Quota 
 
Appointment on Employees Son …………… Under Prime Minister‟s 
Assistance Package   
437-438 
Clarifications Regarding Application of Revised Provincial/ Regional 
…....................s 
130 
Clarification Regarding Provincial/Regional ………….. for Recruitment to the 
Civil Posts under the Federal Government 
125 
Determination of Domicile for the Purpose of Appointments Against 
Provincial/ Regional …....................s 
147-149 
Filling-up of Vacancies – Distribution According to……….….................... for 
Promotion, Transfer and Direct Recruitment 
695 
Isolated Posts – Application of Provincial/Regional …....................s 
130 
Maintenance of Roster for Application of Promotion/Initial Appointment 
…............. 
695-696 
Observance 
of 
Provincial/Regional 
…..............by 
Making 
Contract 
Appointment 
126 
Promotion/Direct Recruitment ….................... 
694 
Provincial / Regional …....................s for Recruitment to the Civil Posts under 
the Federal Government 
125 
Regulation of Provincial/Regional …....................s 
128-129 
Reservation of 10% ….................... for Employment of Women Across-the-
Board in Federal Government Services 
126-127 
Reservation of 05% …………. For Employment of Minorities (Non-Muslims) 
Across-the-Board in Federal Government Services/ Jobs 
127-128 
Uniform Instructions on 2% Disability …………. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
146 

Page-1026                 ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)             
INDEX 
 
 
R 
 
Radio Broadcasts 
 
Clarification of Application of Instructions Regarding…................ to 
Employees of Autonomous Bodies 
790-791 
Recruitment 
 
Application of Instructions for Induction/Re-employment of Armed Forces 
Officers in Autonomous Bodies – Amendment in ………….. Rules 
302 
Amendment in the ….................... Rules of Civil Posts 
336 
Bar Against Revising Qualifications Prescribed for the Posts in the 
…................. Rules 
124 
Change in Requisition for ….................... Placed with the FPSC 
545 
Clarification Regarding General Relaxation of 5 Years in Upper Age Limit 
Prescribed in ….................... Rules 
359-361 
Consultation with F.P.S.C. in Respect of ….................... Rules 
121 
Consultation with F.P.S.C. in Respect of ….................... Rules 
259 
Detailed ….................... Rules Not Necessary Only Method of Appointment, 
Qualifications, Experience etc. to be Notified 
118-120 
Employment of Armed Forces Officers/Personnel – Provisions in ….......... 
Rules 
289 
Filling-up of Vacancies – Distribution According to Quota for Promotion, 
Transfer and Direct ….................... 
695 
Fixation of „inter-se‟-Seniority of Section Officers appointed by direct 
…............ 
88 
Framing of ….................... Rules – Making Ad-Hoc Appointments 
122 
Framing of ….................... Rules : Consultation With FPSC 
121 
General Criteria for Need Assessment, …………….. and Performance Evaluation 
for Hiring Contractual Appointment in Special Professional Pay Scale (SPPS-I,II 
& III) in Ministries/Divisions 
452-455 
Clarification Regarding General Criteria for Need Assessment, ……………… 
and Performance Evaluation for Hiring Contractual Appointment in Special 
Professional Pay Scale (SPPS-I,II & III) in Ministries/Divisions 
455-456 
Waiver of Framing of …………… Rules for Project Posts in Ministries/ 
Divisions 
123 
Framing of ….................... Rules 
114-115 
Mechanism 
to 
Ensure 
Merit 
Based 
….............................. 
in 
the 
Ministries/Divisions/Sub-ordinate 
Offices/Autonomous/ 
Semi-Autonomous 
Bodies/Corporations/Companies/ Authorities  
103-105 
Procedure for Making ….................... from Abroad 
113 
Promotion/Direct ….................... Quota 
 
694 

 INDEX                  ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)               
Page-1027 
 
 
Provincial / Regional Quotas for …............. to the Civil Posts under the Federal 
Government 
125 
………………… to Civil Posts in the Administration of Gilgit Baltistan  
131 
…...........Policy for the Federal Services/Autonomous Bodies/Corporations-
2014 
101-103 
…................ of Candidates on a Pay Higher Than the Minimum Scale of the 
Post 
543-544 
….................... Rules for the Posts of Private Secretary (BPS 17) to the 
Secretaries/ Additional Secretaries and Other Officers in BPS 21/22 Provided 
with the Services of P.S in the Federal Government 
121-122 
….................... to Posts in BPS 16 and Above 
550 
….................... to the Posts of Private Secretaries to the Federal Ministers and 
Ministers of State 
122 
Revised Requisition Form for Direct-….................... Through the Commission 
545-549 
Updation/Revision of ……………. Rules of Various Posts of Ministries/ 
Divisions/Departments under the Federal Government    
106-107 
Criteria 
for 
Counting 
of 
Prescribed 
Length 
of 
Experience 
for 
….........................to Various Posts 
262-263 
Provision of Supporting Information/Documents with Draft Recruitment Rules 
for Obtaining Concurrence of Establishment Division or Framing /Amendment 
of ……………. Rules and Up-gradation/Re-designation of Posts 
115-118 
Validity Period of Waiting/Reserved Merit List for  Making Alternate 
Nominations in the  Cases of …………… by Selection 
264 
Validity Period of Waiting/Reserved Merit List for Making Alternate 
Nomination(s) in the General …………….. Cases 
264 
Re-employment 
 
Application of Instructions for Induction/….................... of Armed Forces 
Officers to Autonomous Bodies 
297 
 
Application of Instructions for Induction/……………… of Armed Forces Officers 
in Autonomous Bodies – Amendment in Recruitment Rules 
302 
Cabinet Decision Regarding ….................... 
919 
Employment after Retirement- Policy and Procedure – ….................... After 
Superannuation 
916-917 
Extension in ….................... on Contract of Armed Forces Officers 
305 
Grant of Allowances During …..................../Contractual Appointment 
927-928 
Guard Against Unauthorised Overstayal after Superannuation/on Expiry of the 
Period of Contract ….................... 
920-921 
Guidelines for ….................... of Retired Armed Forces Officers 
297-298 
Induction/….................... of Armed Forces Officers in Civil Posts – 
Specification of Groups and Cadres 
302-303 
Induction/….................... of Armed Forces Officers in Civil Posts : 
Specification of Groups 
303-304 

Page-1028                 ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)             
INDEX 
 
 
Induction/….................... Of Armed Forces Officers into Civil Posts 
306-307 
Induction/….................... of Officers of Armed Forces of Pakistan in Civil 
Posts 
293-297 
Leave Salary Admissible During ….................... 
932 
Production of Certificate of Physical Fitness by Retired  Government Servants 
on ….................... to Gazetted Posts 
924-925 
….................... – Pay Fixation 
930 
….................... after Superannuation by Corporations/Autonomous Bodies 
918-919 
….................... and Medical Examination 
925-926 
….................... Beyond Superannuation in Unavoidable Cases 
919 
….................... During Refused L.P.R 
918 
…...................of Civil Servants After Compulsory Retirement or Termination 
of Service 
918 
….................... of Consultant After the Age of Superannuation 
404 
….................... of Retired Armed Forces Officers in Civil in Specified Service 
Groups/Ministries through Defence Services Officers Selection Board 
(DSOSB) 
307 
Request for ….................... by Officers Retired Voluntarily 
921 
Secondment/………………… of Armed Forces Officers in Civil 
299-300 
Time Limit for Availing of the Concession of Traveling Allowance After 
Retirement – Admissibility in ….................... in Government 
 
913 
Employment/…....................... of Persons Penalized Under the Government 
Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 1973 and the Removal From 
Service (Special Powers) Ordinance, 2000 
896 
Reform 
 
Tax Administration …....................s: Reorganization of Federal Board of 
Revenue – creation of new occupational service namely Inland Revenue 
Service 
30-33 
Re-Instatement 
Grant of Arrears of Pay and Allowances to Government Servants for Period of 
Absence from Duty, On….................... as a Result of Court‟s Decisions 
833 
Grant of Arrears of Pay and Allowances to Government Servants for Period of 
Absence from Duty, On….................... as a Result of Court‟s Decisions 
836 
Regulation 
 
Federal Public Service Commission (Composition and Condition of  Service) 
…....................s, 1978 
251-256 
…........................of Provincial/Regional Quotas 
128-129 
Removal from Service 
 
Employment/Re-employment of Persons Penalized Under the Government 
Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 1973 and the …................  (Special 
Powers) Ordinance, 2000 
896 

 INDEX                  ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)               
Page-1029 
 
 
…....................as  a  Result  of  Conviction in Court of  Law 
838-839 
Representations 
 
Appeals/Petitions/…........................ by the Civil Servants Addressed to the 
Prime Minister 
954 
Provincial …………….. in Islamabad Capital Territory Administration 
126 
Bar Against Making Joint ….................... 
954 
Forwarding of Advance Copies of the Appeals/…..................../ Petitions etc. 
953 
Guidelines for Submission of Appeals/….................... to the Chief Executive/ 
President 
952-953 
Use of Intemperate and Inappropriate Language in ….................... and Petitions 
of Government Servants 
832 
Retirement 
 
Authorities Competent to Accept Requests for ….................... 
904-905 
Civil Servants (Directory ……………. From Service) Rules,2020 
941-944 
Clarification of Withdrawal of Request of LPR/…........................ After 
Sanction/Notification 
483-484 
Employment after …....................- Policy and Procedure – Re-employment 
After Superannuation 
916-917 
Encashment of LPR on Premature ….................... 
485-486 
Further Clarification of Withdrawal of Request of LPR/…........................... 
After Sanction/Notification 
484 
Notifying ….................... of an Officer on Attaining the Age of Superannuation 
907 
Option of Premature ….................... by Deputationists Abroad 
594 
Permission to Seek Private Employment by Civil Servants During LPR Within 
Two Years of ….................... 
487-488 
Permission to Seek Private Employment by Civil Servants During LPR Within 
Two Years of ….................... 
921-922 
Placement of ……….. Judicial Officers in MP-I Scale 
968 
Recall to Duty After Premature ….................... 
907 
Re-Employment of Civil Servants After Compulsory ….................... or 
Termination of Service 
918 
….................... on Completion of 25 Years Service – Right to Retire Through 
Written Intimation 
905 
….................... on Completion of 25 years Service Qualifying for Pension 
(General Instructions) – Retiring Pension 
905-906 
….................... on Completion of Sixtieth Year of Age 
903-904 
T. A. for Journey on ….................... – Determination of Home Town 
912 
T.A. for Journey on …....................-Cost of Transportation of Personal Car/ 
Motorcycle/Scooter 
911 
T. A. for Journey on ………………… –Admissibility of TA to Employees with 
Home Towns of Gilgit Baltistan and Chitral 
 
913 

Page-1030                 ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)             
INDEX 
 
 
Time Limit for Availing of the Concession of Traveling Allowance After 
….................... – Admissibility in Re-employment in Government 
913 
Time-Limit for Availing of the Concession of Traveling Allowance After 
….................... 
912 
Traveling Allowance for Journey on ….................... (for Mission Abroad) 
910 
Withdrawal of Applications for Premature ….................... 
906 
Clarification Regarding Option of Seeking Pre-mature …....................... 
894-895 
Permission to Seek Private Employment by Civil Servants During LPR and 
within Two Years of …....................... 
487-488 
Permission to Seek Private Employment by Civil Servants During LPR and 
within Two Years of …....................... 
921-922 
Voluntary …………. Of Government Servants 
906 
Resignation 
 
Acceptance of…....................During Pendency of Disciplinary Proceedings 
937-938 
Procedure for Processing of Cases of ….................... of Officers 
940 
Proposal for ….................... and Original Letter of ….................... 
938-939 
Proposals for ….................... to be Self-Contained 
939 
….................... of Temporary Government Servants 
934 
Withdrawal of ….................... by Government Servants 
938 
Resolution  
 
C.S.P. …....................... and Principal Decisions of Government 
13-16 
Reversion 
 
Counting of Period of Formal Promotion Towards Increment on ….................... 
to Parent Office 
576 
Departmental 
Promotion 
Committee 
not 
Concerned 
with 
Demotions/..................s 
936 
….................... of Ad-Hoc Appointees 
935-936 
….................... of Deputationists to Parent Departments 
698-699 
….................... of Probationers Undergoing Training at the Civil Services 
Academy to Their Former Post 
572 
….................... to Lower Grade/Post 
935 
….................... to Parent Group/Cadre 
935 
Seniority of Ad-Hoc Appointees for Purposes of ….................... or Termination 
of Services on Availability of Regular Appointees 
385 
Rotation Policy 
 
…....................... For  PAS/PSP Officers 
528-533 
Rules (s) 
 
Amendment in the Recruitment …....................s of Civil Posts 
336 
Amendments in Government Servants Conduct …..............................., 1964 
And Submission of Declaration of Income and Assets Held and Acquired By 
Government Servants and Corporation Employees 
770 

 INDEX                  ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)               
Page-1031 
 
 
Application of Instructions for Induction/Re-employment of Armed Forces 
Officers in Autonomous Bodies – Amendment in Recruitment ………… 
302 
Appointment by Transfer in Office Management Group (OMG) (Conduct of 
examination) ………..,2020 
196-218 
Appointment of an Inquiry Officer Under the Government Servants (Efficiency 
and Discipline) …...................., 1973, 
817-818 
Civil Servants (Efficiency & Discipline) ………,2020 
805-815 
Civil Servants Promotion (BPS-18 to BPS-21) …………,2019 
636-667 
Civil Servants (Directory Retirement from Service) ………..,2020 
941-944 
Clarification Regarding Occupational Groups and Services (Probation, Training 
and Seniority) ………....,1990 
22-23 
Conditions for Appointment, Promotion and Transfer …............ for Assistant 
Incharge, Stenotypist, Assistant, UDC and LDC 
340-342 
Conditions for Appointment, Promotion and Transfer …................ for Private 
Secretary, Superintendent and Stenographer 
342-344 
CSS-Competitive Examination ………s,2019 
151-171 
Section Officer Promotional Examination …………s,2015 
172-196 
Bar Against Revising Qualifications Prescribed for the Posts in the Recruitment 
…....................s 
124 
Civil Servants (Appeal) …....................s, 1977  
949-952 
Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) …................s, 1973 
327-336 
Civil Servants (Confirmation) …....................s, 1993 
336-339 
Civil Servants (Seniority) …....................s, 1993 
620-622 
Civil Servants (Service in International Organization) ………..s,2016 
603-607 
Civil Service of Pakistan (Composition and Cadre) …....................s, 1954 
16-22 
Clarification Regarding General Relaxation of 5 Years in Upper Age Limit 
Prescribed in Recruitment …....................s 
359-361 
Consultation with F.P.S.C. in Respect of Recruitment …....................s 
121 
Consultation with F.P.S.C. in Respect of Recruitment …....................s 
259 
Delegation of Powers to Secretaries to Government  under the Government 
Servants (Conduct) …...................., 1964 
753 
Detailed Recruitment …....................s Not Necessary Only Method of 
Appointment, Qualifications, Experience etc. to be Notified 
118-120 
Disciplinary Proceedings under Government Servants (Efficiency and 
Discipline) …................................., 1973 against Accused Government 
Servants: Furnishing of Case Material 
815-816 
Employment of Armed Forces Officers/Personnel – Provisions in Recruitment 
…....................s 
289 
Employment/Re-employment of Persons Penalized Under the Government 
Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) …...................., 1973 and the Removal 
From Service (Special Powers) Ordinance, 2000 
896 
Federal Public Service Commission (Functions) …...................., 1978 
257-258 

Page-1032                 ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)             
INDEX 
 
 
Framing of Recruitment …....................s – Making Ad-Hoc Appointments 
122 
Framing of Recruitment …....................s : Consultation With FPSC 
121 
Waiver of Framing of Recruitment ………………..s for Project Posts in 
Ministries/ Divisions 
123 
Framing of Recruitment …....................s 
114-115 
Government Servants (Applications for Services and Posts) …................s, 1966 540-542 
Government Servants (Conduct) …...................., 1964 
743-753 
Government Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) …...................., 1973 
 
Government Servants(Marriage with Foreign Nationals)…................, 1962 
800-803 
Grant of Extraordinary Leave (Leave Without Pay) Under ….................... 9 of 
the Revised Leave …....................s, 1980 
491 
Grant of Leave to Government Servants Compulsorily Retired from Service 
under the Government Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) ….................... 
832 
National School of Public Policy …………s,2017 
704-708 
Need of Keeping the Provisions of FR-29 in View While Imposing the Penalty 
Under …............ 4(1)(b)(i) of the Government Servants (Efficiency and 
Discipline) …...........,1973 
818 
Initial Appointment to Civil Posts (Relaxation of Upper Age Limit) 
…....................s, 1993 
358-359 
Interpretation of the term “Government” as Defined in the Government 
Servants (Conduct) …...................., 1964 
 
753-754 
Occupational Groups and Services (Final Passing Out Examination)………, 
2003 
79-80 
Occupational Groups and Services (Probation, Training and Seniority) 
…....................s, 1990 
75-79 
Quarterly Statement Regarding Permissions Granted to the Federal 
Government Officers Under Government Servants (Conduct) …...................., 
1964 by the Provincial Government to Buy and Sell Assets 
776 
Recruitment …....................s for the Posts of Private Secretary (BPS 17) to the 
Secretaries/ Additional Secretaries and Other Officers in BPS 21/22 Provided 
with the Services of P.S in the Federal Government 
121-122 
Requirement to Issue a Fresh Show Cause Notice if the Penalty Imposed Under 
Government Servants (Efficiency And Discipline) …...................., 1973, or 
Proposed to be Imposed is Greater than that Specified in the Show Cause 
Notice, or is Proposed to be Enhanced by the Appellate Authority 
819-820 
Revised Leave …....................s, 1980 
467-481 
Revision of Traveling Allowance …....................s (Within Pakistan) 
910-911 
Scope of Departmental Proceedings under the Efficiency and Discipline 
….................... in Cases Referred to the Courts 
827-828 
Section Officers‟ (Probation, Training and Seniority) …....................s, 1964 
86-88 
Study Leave …....................s Prescribed by  the President (F.R. 84) 
 
497-500 

 INDEX                  ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)               
Page-1033 
 
 
The Provincial Management Services (PMS) and Provincial Civil Services 
(PCS) Induction into Pakistan Administrative Service ……….,2020 
219-245 
The Civil Servants (Validation of …....................s) Ordinance, 2001 
8 
The Service Tribunals (Procedure) …...................., 1974 
960-967 
Withholding of Appeals Under the Civil Servants (Appeal) …..........., 1977 
954-955 
Updation/Revision of Recruitment …………… of Various Posts of Ministries/ 
Divisions/Departments under the Federal Government    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
106-107 

Page-1034                 ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)             
INDEX 
 
 
S 
 
Section Officer(s) 
 
Application of …................for Ex-Cadre Posts 
576-577 
Applications of…................ 
552 
Deputation of …................Against Other Posts 
577-578 
Eligibility of Superintendent (BS-17) to Participate in ….………… 
Promotional Examinations 
196 
Eligibility of Superintendent (BS-17) to Participate in ….………… 
Promotional Examinations 
696 
Filling-up of Vacancies on Proceeding of …................on LPR 
495 
Creation/Abolition of Posts of Joint Secretary,  Deputy Secretary and 
….................... 
22 
Fixation of „inter-se‟-Seniority of …................appointed by direct recruitment 
88 
Grant 
of 
Current 
Charge 
of 
the 
Post 
of 
……………… 
to 
Superintendents/Assistants in Ministries/Divisions 
376 
Leave Reserve under the …................Scheme and its Proper Utilization 
493-494 
…................ (Probation, Training and Seniority) Rules, 1964 
86-88 
…………….. Promotional Examination Rules,2015 
172-196 
Surrender of ………..s Without Issue of Notification by Establishment Division 
536 
Scheme 
 
Mode of Notifying Appointments, Promotions etc., after Introduction of  the 
…................ of Basic Pay Scales 
396-398 
Leave Reserve under the Section Officers‟ …................and its Proper Utilization 
493-494 
Service (s) 
 
Acting Charge Appointment – Counting of …................, 
381-382 
Assistance Package for Families of Government Employees Who Die in 
………. 
418-419 
Assistance Package for Families of Government Employees Who Die in 
………. 
419-424 
Assistance Package for Families of Government Employees Who Die in 
………. 
425 
.Assistance Package for Families of Government Employees Who Die in 
……… 
425 
Assistance Package for Families of Government Employees Who Die in 
………. 
425-426 
Civil Servants (…………. In International Organization) Rules,2016 
603-607 
Revision of Assistance Package for Families of Government Employees Who 
Die in ………….. 
426-430 
Revision of Assistance Package for Families of Government Employees Who 
Die in ………….. 
430-431 

 INDEX                  ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)               
Page-1035 
 
 
Revision of Assistance Package for Families of Government Employees Who 
Die in …………… 
431 
Revision of Assistance Package for Families of Government Employees Who 
Die in …………….. 
431-432 
Revision of Assistance Package for Families of Government Employees Who 
Die in Service 
432 
Revision of Assistance Package for Families of Government Employees Who 
Die in …………….. 
432 
Revision of Assistance Package for Families of Government Employees Who 
Die in …………….. 
432-433 
Revision of Assistance Package for Families of Government Employees Who 
Die in …………….. (For Shuhda of ICT Police) 
433-437 
Revision of Assistance Package for Families of Government Employees Who 
Die in …………….. (For Shuhda of ANF Personnel)  
438-441 
Change of Occupational Groups/…………. 
90 
Civil Servants (Directory Retirement from …………) Rules,2020 
941-944 
Determination of Seniority/Length of ……… of All Occupational Groups and 
…………… 
80 
Determination of Inter-se-Seniority of Officers of All Occupational Groups and 
…………. 
81-82 
Determination of Inter-se-Seniority of Officers of All Occupational Groups and 
…………. 
82-83 
Determination of Inter-se-Seniority of Probationers of All Occupational Groups 
and ………….. who Repeat Their CTP Due to Unsatisfactory Performance 
84 
Demands of …................ Associations 
795-796 
Determination of Length of …................ in Case of Repeaters 
82 
Determination of Length of …................ in Case of Repeaters 
84 
Determination of Length of …................ in Case of Repeaters 
84-85 
Benefit of Promotion in Parent Cadre while in Foreign …................ 
583 
Change of Domicile After Entry into Government …................ 
150 
Civil …................ of Pakistan (Composition and Cadre) Rules, 1954 
16-22 
Clarification Regarding Length of …................ for Current Charge 
374 
Continuation in …................ Beyond Superannuation 
919-920 
Counting of …................ Rendered Against Higher Post Under Section 10 of 
the Civil Servants Act, 1973 
673-674 
Counting of Ad-Hoc …................ for the Purpose of Promotion 
673 
Employment of Ex-….............men and Pakistan Armed…................s Board 
(PASB) 
290-291 
Employment of Ex-…................men from Other Regions if Locally Not Available 
292 
Employment of Ex-…................men in Government Departments against posts in 
BPS 1-4 
 
289-290 

Page-1036                 ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)             
INDEX 
 
 
Expeditious Processing of Cases Where the Medical Authority Certified That a 
Government Servant is Permanently Incapacitated For …................ 
506 
Framework of Rules and Procedure applicable to Pakistan Audit and Accounts 
…................ 
53-57 
Gazetted and Non-Gazetted Technical …................s 
578 
Government Servants (Applications for …................s and Posts) Rules, 1966 
540-542 
Grant of Starting Salary to Candidates after Selection by the Federal Public 
…................ Commission 
549-550 
Induction of Armed Forces Officers in Pakistan Administrative …………., 
Police ……….. of Pakistan and Foreign …………. Of Pakistan BS-17 
307 
Inclusion of Commissioned ….........in Armed Forces in Length of ............... in 
Civil Posts 
299 
Initial Training of the Probationers appointed to various Groups/…................s 
on the Results of the Annual Competitive Examination held by the FPSC 
90-92 
Letter of Chairman Federal .……….. Tribunal Making Suggestions to Reduce 
Pending Litigation 
971 
Length of …................ for Promotion from BPS-16 to BPS-18 Where There is 
No Intermediate Post in BPS-17 
674 
Minimum Length of ............. for Eligibility for Promotion for Posts in Various 
BPS 
671-672 
Occupational Groups and.............s (Probation, Training and Seniority) Rules, 1990 
75-79 
Permanent Seat of the ………. Tribunal 
968 
Possession of Prescribed Minimum Length of …................ does not Confer a 
Right to Promotion Over Senior Persons 
674 
Principle of Equivalence – Defence …................s and National Pay Scales 
929-930 
Procedure for Grant of Leave to High Officials and to the Officers Belonging to 
Groups/…..............................s/Cadres Controlled by the Establishment Division 
490 
Promotion Related Capacity Building of Civil Servants in BPS 17 to BPS 19 of 
Various Occupational Groups/…................s, 
708-720 
Recovery of Leave Salary and Pension Contribution in Respect of Federal 
Government Employees on Deputation to Foreign …................ within Pakistan or 
Abroad 
584-585 
Recruitment Rules for the Posts of Private Secretary (BPS 17) to the 
Secretaries/ Additional Secretaries and Other Officers in BPS 21/22 Provided 
with the …................s of P.S in the Federal Government 
121-122 
Re-Employment of Civil Servants After Compulsory Retirement or Termination 
of …................ 
918 
Re-Employment of Retired Armed Forces Officers in Civil in Specified 
…................ Groups/Ministries through Defence …................s Officers Selection 
Board (DSOSB) 
307 
Reservation of 10% Quota for Employment of Women Across-the-Board in 
Federal Government …................s 
 
126-127 

 INDEX                  ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)               
Page-1037 
 
 
Reservation of 05% Quota for Employment of Minorities (Non-Muslims) 
Across-the-Board in Federal Government …………../ Jobs 
127-128 
Retirement on Completion of 25 Years …................ – Right to Retire Through 
Written Intimation 
905 
Retirement on Completion of 25 years …................ Qualifying for Pension 
(General Instructions) – Retiring Pension 
905-906 
Reversion of Probationers Undergoing Training at the Civil …................s 
Academy to Their Former Post 
572 
Seniority of Ad-Hoc Appointees for Purposes of Reversion or Termination of 
…................s on Availability of Regular Appointees 
385 
Standard Terms and Conditions of …................ for Government Servants who 
Proceed for …................ Abroad 
591-593 
The Provincial Management …………s (PMS) and Provincial Civil 
………….s (PCS) Induction into Pakistan Administrative …………. 
Rules,2020 
219-245 
Termination of …................ of Temporary Government Servants 
934 
Termination of …................s of Officers Employed on Contract  
934 
Terms and Conditions of …................ of Army Engineer Officers transferred to 
the Survey of Pakistan 
285-288 
Terms and Conditions of Deputation of Civil Servants to Foreign …............ in 
Pakistan 
566 
Bar Against Use of Government Stationery and …....................... Postage 
Stamps by Accused Government Servants in Disciplinary Proceedings 
823 
Channel 
of 
Communication 
Between 
Recognized 
…....................... 
Associations and Government 
796 
Employment/Re-employment of Persons Penalized Under the Government 
Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules, 1973 and the Removal From 
…....................... (Special Powers) Ordinance, 2000 
896 
Extraneous Influence by Government Servants in Respect of …....................... 
Matters 
788 
Federal Public …....................... Commission (Composition and Condition of 
….......................) Regulations, 1978 
251-256 
Federal Public …....................... Commission (Functions) Rules, 1978 
257-258 
Federal Public …....................... Commission Ordinance, 1977 
246-251 
Grant of Leave to Government Servants Compulsorily Retired from 
…....................... under the Government Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) 
Rules 
832 
Measures to Curb Extraneous Influences by Government Servants in 
…....................... Matters 
789 
Permission to Representatives of …....................... Associations to Attend 
Various Meetings 
795 
Permissions Granted by the Provincial Governments to the Officers of All 
Pakistan …......................./Federal Government Officers 
923 

Page-1038                 ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)             
INDEX 
 
 
Removal  From  …....................... as  a  Result  of  Conviction in Court of  Law 838-839 
Termination of …....................... of Temporary Government Servants under 
Suspension 
823-825 
The …....................... Tribunals (Procedure) Rules, 1974 
960-967 
The …....................... Tribunals Act, 1973 (Act No. LXX of 1973) 
956-960 
Security Pass 
 
Loss of …................ to be Treated as „Misconduct‟ 
831-832 
Secretaries  
 
Appointment of …................ to Government 
386-387 
Combination of Appointments – Authorization to …................ 
379 
Grant of Leave to …................, Heads of Departments and Heads of 
Autonomous Bodies 
505-506 
Grant of Leave to …………….., Heads of Departments and Heads of 
Autonomous/Semi-Autonomous Bodies/ Corporations 
504-505 
Grant of Leave to Officers in BPS-22 other than …................ and Heads of 
Departments in BPS-22 
504 
Procedure for Grant of Casual Leave to …................ 
502 
Procedure for Grant of Casual Leave to the …................ to the Government and 
Heads of Departments 
501-502 
Recruitment Rules for the Posts of Private Secretary (BPS 17) to the 
…................/ Additional …................ and Other Officers in BPS 21/22 
Provided with the Services of P.S in the Federal Government 
121-122 
Recruitment to the Posts of Private …................ to the Federal Ministers and 
Ministers of State 
122 
Delegation of Powers to …....................... to Government  under the 
Government Servants (Conduct) Rules, 1964 
753 
Delegation of Powers to …....................... to Government of Pakistan – Heads 
of Departments 
753 
Secretariat Group 
 
Framework of Rules and Procedure applicable to…................ 
70-72 
Induction in …........................ as Deputy Secretary (BS-19) 
265-269 
Induction in …....................... as Joint Secretary (BS-20) 
269-282 
Security Scholarships  
 
Bar Against …....................................... and Invitation   to Visit Abroad 
798 
Selection (s) 
 
Adequate Circulation of Vacancy Notice – View of Special …................ Board 
587 
Composition of Departmental Promotion/…................ Committees 
676 
Composition of Departmental ………….. Board (DSB) for Promotion of 
Federal Civil Servants from BS-18 to BS-19 
677-678 
Consideration of Cases by Central …................ Board – Furnishing of Full 
Particulars of Candidates for Promotion 
 
692 

 INDEX                  ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)               
Page-1039 
 
 
Convention Regarding Acceptance of Recommendations of the …................ 
Board 
693-694 
Decisions by Special …................ Board 
588 
Extension in Deputation – Decision by Special …................ Board 
594 
Failure of the Provincial Governments and Federal Ministries/Divisions to 
Inform the F.P.S.C. about Withholding of Application Within One Month of 
the Closing Date Not to Affect the Candidate‟s …................/Appointment 
543 
Functions of the Special …................ Board 
589 
Grant of Starting Salary to Candidates after …................ by the Federal Public 
Service Commission 
549-550 
Guidelines for Submission of Proposals for Consideration of the Central 
…................ Board (CSB) 
691 
Meetings of the Central …................ Board, 
694 
Procedure for Referring Cases to the …................ Board 
691-692 
Proposal for Central …................ Board – Revised Forms (March, 1999) 
681-690 
Proposals for Central …................ Board – Prescribed Forms and Check List 
(March, 1990) 
678-680 
Re-appointment to Posts Within the Purview of …................ Board 
692 
Reconstitution of …................ Board for Posts in Basic Pay Scale-19 
 
Re-Employment of Retired Armed Forces Officers in Civil in Specified Service 
Groups/Ministries through Defence Services Officers …................ Board 
(DSOSB) 
307 
……………… Procedure of Chief Executives in Key Public Sector Enterprises 109-112 
Selection Board 
 
Adequate Circulation of Vacancy Notice – View of Special…................ 
587 
Consideration of Cases by Central…................– Furnishing of Full Particulars of 
Candidates for Promotion 
692 
Convention Regarding Acceptance of Recommendations of the…................ 
693-694 
Decisions by Special…................ 
588 
Extension in Deputation – Decision by Special…................ 
594 
Functions of the Special…................ 
589 
Guidelines 
for 
Submission 
of 
Proposals 
for 
Consideration 
of 
the 
Central…................ 
691 
Meetings of the Central…................ 
694 
Procedure for Referring Cases to the…................ 
691-692 
Proposal for Central…................– Revised Forms (March, 1999) 
681-690 
Proposals for Central…................ – Prescribed Forms and Check List (March, 
1990) 
678-680 
Re-appointment to Posts Within the Purview of…................ 
692 
Reconstitution of …................for Posts in Basic Pay Scale-19 
 
Re-Employment of Retired Armed Forces Officers in Civil in Specified Service 
Groups/Ministries through Defence Services Officers …................ (DSOSB) 
307 

Page-1040                 ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)             
INDEX 
 
 
Seniority 
 
Civil Servants (…................) Rules, 1993 
620-622 
Current Charge Appointment – Determination of …................ Within an 
Organization 
375 
Determination of ………./Length of Service of All Occupational Groups and 
Services 
80 
Determination of Inter-se-…........... of Officers of All Occupational Groups  
81 
Determination of Inter-se-…............ of Officers of All Occupational Groups 
and Services 
81-82 
Determination of Inter-se-……………. Of Officers of All Occupational Groups 
and Services 
82-83 
Determination of Inter-se-……………. Of Probationers of All Occupational 
Groups and Services who Repeat Their CTP Due to Unsatisfactory 
Performance 
84 
Determination 
of 
Inter-se-………………. 
When 
Specialized 
Training 
Programme (STP) is Deferred/repeated 
85-86 
Fixation of ‘inter-se’-…............................. of Section Officers appointed by 
direct recruitment 
88 
 
Merger of the Cadres of Urdu and English Typist/Stenotypist/ Stenographer for 
Purposes of …................, Promotion etc. 
627-628 
Names of the Selected Persons to be Arranged in the Order of ………................. 
677 
Occupational Groups and Services (Probation, Training and ................) Rules, 
1990 
75-79 
Pay Fixation and …................ of Armed Forces Officers Inducted in Civil Posts 
300 
Preparation of …................ Lists BPS Wise 
617-619 
Section Officers‟ (Probation, Training and …................) Rules, 1964 
86-88 
…................ of Ad-Hoc Appointees for Purposes of Reversion or Termination 
of Services on Availability of Regular Appointees 
385 
…................ of Joint Secretaries and Holders of Former Senior Administrative 
Grade 
89 
…................ of Officers and Occupational Groups After Administrative Reforms 
619-620 
Service Matters 
 
Extraneous Influence by Government Servants in Respect of…....................... 
788 
Measures to Curb Extraneous Influences by Government Servants in 
…....................... 
789 
Service Tribunals 
 
Defence of Cases in the ….................... and Law Courts 
968-970 
Letter of Attorney General of Pakistan Regarding Implementation of Orders of 
the Federal …………… and High Courts Appealed Against in Supreme Court 
of Pakistan 
970 
Letter of Chairman Federal ………….. Making Suggestions to Reduce Pending 
Litigation 
971 
Permanent Seat of the…................ 
968 

 INDEX                  ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)               
Page-1041 
 
 
The …....................... (Procedure) Rules,1974 
960-967 
The …....................... Act, 1973 (Act No. LXX of 1973) 
956-960 
Sparability Certificate 
………………….. 
590 
Special Selection Board 
 
Adequate Circulation of Vacancy Notice – View of................... 
587 
Decisions by................... 
588 
Extension in Deputation – Decision by................... 
594 
Procedure for Submission of Cases to ................... 
589-590 
Requirement of Second Approval by ................... 
590-591 
Staff Car Driver 
 
Reservation of 50% Vacancies in BPS 1-3 and in BPS 4 of................... /Despatch 
Rider for Armed Forces Personnel 
 
291-292 
Study Leave 
 
See “Leave” 
 
Studies 
 
Knowledge of Islamic/Pakistan................... 
732-733 
Uniform Treatment of Officers Proceeding Abroad to Pursue Higher ………. 
519 
Uniform Treatment of Officers Proceeding Abroad to Pursue Higher ………. 
520 
Superannuation 
 
Continuation in Service Beyond ................... 
919-920 
Employment after Retirement- Policy and Procedure – Re-employment After 
................... 
916-917 
Guard Against Unauthorised Overstayal after .................../on Expiry of the Period 
of Contract Re-employment 
920-921 
Indication of Date of ................... of Officers Proposed for Appointment to 
Tenure Posts 
917-918 
Notifying Retirement of an Officer on Attaining the Age of ........................... 
907 
Provision of Government Accommodation to all Government Servants Employed 
on Contract after ................... 
457 
Re-employment after ................... by Corporations/Autonomous Bodies 
918-919 
Re-employment Beyond ................... in Unavoidable Cases 
919 
Re-employment of Consultant After the Age of ................... 
404 
Superintendent  
 
Grant of BPS-17 to the ..........................................(BPS-16) in the Federal 
Government Ministries/Divisions/Attached Departments/Subordinate Offices 
674-675 
Eligibility of ….………… (BS-17) to Participate in Section Officers 
Promotional Examinations 
196 
Eligibility of ….………… (BS-17) to Participate in Section Officers 
Promotional Examinations 
696 

Page-1042                 ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)             
INDEX 
 
 
Suspension/Suspend 
 
Vacancies Caused by .......................... of Government Servants 
401 
Admissibility of TA to Government Servants under .......................... 
827 
Filling Up of .......................... Vacancies 
823 
Leaving Station by Government Servants under .......................... 
822 
Termination of Services of Temporary Government Servants under 
..................... 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
823-825 

 INDEX                  ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)               
Page-1043 
 
 
T 
 
Temporary 
 
Right of Reversion to ................... Government Servants 
572 
Terms and Conditions  
 
Convention Between the Central Government and the Provincial Governments 
„Inter-Se‟ Regarding .......................of Deputationists 
580 
Standard .......................of Contract Appointments – Case of Retired Civil 
Servants, Retired Officers of the Armed Forces, Retired Judges of Superior 
Courts 
370-371 
Standard .......................of Contract Appointments – Case of Retired Civil 
Servants, Retired Officers of the Armed Forces, Retired Judges of Superior 
Courts 
371 
Standard .......................of Contract Appointments – Case of Retired Civil 
Servants, Retired Officers of the Armed Forces, Retired Judges of Superior 
Courts 
371-372 
Standard .......................of Service for Government Servants who Proceed for 
Service Abroad 
591-593 
.......................of Deputation of Civil Servants 
560 
.......................of Deputation of Civil Servants 
562-565 
....................... of Deputation of Civil Servants to Foreign Service in Pakistan 
566 
Tenure 
 
Indication of Date of Superannuation of Officers Proposed for Appointment to 
....................... Posts 
917-918 
Termination  
 
Re-employment of Civil Servants After Compulsory Retirement or ..................... 
of Service 
918 
Seniority of Ad-Hoc Appointees for Purposes of Reversion or ................... of 
Services on Availability of Regular Appointees 
385 
................... of Contract of Armed Forces Officers in Civil Posts 
301-302 
................... of Service of Temporary Government Servants 
934 
................... of Services of Officers Employed on Contract   
934 
................... of Services of Temporary Government Servants under Suspension 823-825 
Training 
 
Determination 
of 
Inter-se-Seniority 
when 
Specialized 
…………….. 
Programme (STP) is Deferred/repeated 
85-86 
Initial ....................... of the Probationers appointed to various Groups/Services 
on the Results of the Annual Competitive Examination held by the FPSC 
90-92 
Leave and ................... Reserve 
495-496 
Occupational Groups and Services (Probation, .............. and Seniority) Rules, 1990 
75-79 
 

Page-1044                 ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)             
INDEX 
 
 
Reversion of Probationers Undergoing ................... at the Civil Services Academy 
to Their Former Post 
572 
Section Officers' (Probation, ................... and Seniority) Rules, 1964 
86-88 
Approaching Foreign Missions and Aid Giving Agencies By Officers to Secure 
Invitation to Visit a Foreign Country or to Elicit Offers of ................... Facilities 
797 
Transfer (s) 
 
Appointment by ………….. in Office Management Group (OMG) (Conduct of 
examination) Rules,2020 
196-218 
Conditions for Appointment, Promotion and ................... Rules for Assistant 
Incharge, Stenotypist, Assistant, UDC and LDC 
340-342 
Conditions for Appointment, Promotion and ................... Rules for Private 
Secretary, Superintendent and Stenographer 
342-344 
Authorities Empowered to Make Postings and ...................s of Officers and Staff 
521 
Charge Report by Officers Proceeding on ................... 
537 
Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and ...................) Rules, 1973 
327-336 
Consideration for Promotion of a Person on ................... to Another Office 
697 
Declining Promotion to Evade ................... to an Unattractive Station 
733 
Filling-up of Vacancies – Distribution According to Quota for Promotion, 
................... and Direct Recruitment 
695 
General Conditions Regarding Postings, ...................s and Deputation-F.R. 15 
515 
Implementation of …………. Orders of Officers 
535 
Instructions to Regulate Cases of ...................s/Deputation of Staff from One 
Office to Another 
566-570 
Notifications Regarding Postings, ...................s etc. of Officers of the Status of 
Joint Secretary and Above 
387-388 
Policy Guidelines for Postings/...................s of Officers 
515-516 
Postings and ...................s of Officers who hold the Status of Joint Secretary to the 
Federal Government 
522 
Premature ................... of Government Servants Between Pakistan and Pakistan 
Missions Abroad 
538-539 
Posting and ………… of Officers 
535 
Revision of ....................... Grant, Transportation of Motorcar/Motorcycle/ Scooter 
and Mileage Allowance 
914-915 
Sanction and Notification of Leave of Officers ...................red to Other Posts 
491 
Terms and Conditions of Service of Army Engineer Officers ...................red to the 
Survey of Pakistan 
 
 
 
 
285-288 

 INDEX                  ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)               
Page-1045 
 
 
U 
 
Upgradation/Upgraded 
 
Policy for ......................./Redesignation of Posts 
412-413 
.......................of Posts and Procedure for Filling-up of Upgraded Posts 
411 
Appointment to ................... Posts 
 
.......................... of the Posts of Stenotypist, Stenographer and Private Secretary 415-416 
.......................of Posts 
411-412 
Provision of Supporting Information/Documents with Draft Recruitment Rules 
for Obtaining Concurrence of Establishment Division or Framing /Amendment 
of Recruitment Rules and …………../Re-designation of Posts 
115-118 
…………… of Ministerial Posts 
413-414 
…………... of Ministerial Posts 
415 
…………/Re-designation of the Post 
417 
UN Agencies 
 
Ex-Government Servants Employed by .......................... 
924 
UN Missions 
 
Deployment of Police Personnel in .......................... 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
608-609 

Page-1046                 ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)             
INDEX 
 
 
V 
 
Vacancies 
 
Adequate Circulation of ...................Notice – View of Special Selection Board 
587 
Circulation of .......................Notices 
588 
Filling-up of ................... – Distribution According to Quota for Promotion, 
Transfer and Direct Recruitment 
695 
Reservation of 50% ................... in BPS 1-3 and in BPS 4 of Staff Car 
Driver/Despatch Rider for Armed Forces Personnel 
291-292 
Filling Up of Suspension............... 
823 
Visit Abroad 
 
Instructions on ……….s Abroad 
522 
Bar Against Security Scholarships and Invitation to ……………. 
798 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 INDEX                  ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)               
Page-1047 
 
 
W 
Warning 
 
Censure, Reprimand and ....................... 
829 
Women 
 
Reservation of 10% Quota for Employment of ................... Across-the-Board in 
Federal Government Services 
126-127 
Wedlock Policy 
 
…………….. 
523 
 
 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page-1048                 ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)             
INDEX 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 INDEX                  ESTACODE (EDITION-2021)               
Page-1049 
 
 
LIST OF PUBLICATIONS PUBLISHED BY THE PAKISTAN PUBLIC 
ADMINISTRATION RESEARCH CENTRE 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Publication 
Price 
Per  
Copy 
1 
A Manual on Occupational Groups/Services (Ed-2014) 
300/- 
2 
A Manual of Travelling Allowance Rules (Ed-2013) 
200/- 
3 
A Compendium of Laws and Rules Containing Efficiency and Discipline Rules  
(Ed-2012) 
200/- 
4 
A Manual on Management of Public Record and State Documents (Ed-2012) 
100/- 
5 
A Manual on Benevolent & Group Insurance, Benefits (Ed-2010) 
100/- 
6 
A Manual on Staff Welfare Organization (Ed-2010) 
200/- 
7 
ESTACODE (Ed-2007) 
1110/- 
8 
A Compendium of Services Laws and Rules (Ed-2003) 
180/- 
9 
The Establishment Manual (Ed-1992) 
400/- 
10 
Secretariat Instructions 
135/- 
11 
Common Services Manual Vol-II(Ed-1997) 
260/- 
12 
A Manual of Pension Procedures (Ed-2006) 
145/- 
13 
A Guide to Performance Evaluation (Ed-2004) 
120/- 
14 
Compendium of Laws Applicable to Federal Government Employees (Ed-1990) 
100/- 
15 
Compendium of Rules Applicable to Federal Government Employees (Ed-1992) 
130/- 
16 
A Hand Book on Autonomous Bodies (Ed-1989) 
120/- 
17 
Reference Book on Autonomous Bodies(Ed-1989) 
160/- 
18 
Government and Administration in Pakistan(Ed-2003) 
800/- 
19 
National Strategy for Administration (Reprint-2003) 
70/- 
20 
Civil Services in Pakistan (Reprint-2003) 
110/- 
21 
Evolution of Pakistan's Administrative System(Reprint-2003) 
260/- 
22 
Bibliography Pak. Government and Administration Vol-I-III 
160/- 
23 
Bibliography Pak. Government and Administration Vol-III.A(Ed-1987) 
40/- 
24 
Bibliography Pak. Government and Administration Vol-IV(Ed-1983) 
50/- 
25 
F.G. Civil Servants Census Reprint-1989 
100/- 
26 
Administration Journal 
100/- 
27 
Second Census of Employees of Autonomous Bodies/Corporations 
100/- 
28 
How to Supervise Workers at work 
135/- 
 
Note. 
i). 
The Publications are supplied after receipt of payment in case of offices located at 
Islamabad/Rawalpindi through Treasury Challan in National  Bank of Pakistan Main Branch  Civic Centre 
Melody, Islamabad or State Bank of Pakistan in  the following  Head of Account. 
 
 
“C03-Misc.Receipts. 
 
C038-Others 
 
C03853-Sale of Publications of (PPARC), Establishment Division, Islamabad” 
 
and in case of out stationed offices through a bank draft in favour of the DDO, PPARC, M.S.Wing, 
Establishment Division, Islamabad. 
 
ii). 
The above publications are available at the Sales Depot of PPARC at Ground Floor Local 
Government & Rural Development Complex, Sector G-5/2, Islamabad to be deposited in NBP Main Branch, 
Melody or State Bank of Pakistan.  
____________________ 
