 
For official use only 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RULES OF BUSINESS, 
RULES OF BUSINESS, 
1973 
1973 
 
 
 
 
(As Amended up to 11th May, 2026) 
(As Amended up to 11th May, 2026) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CABINET SECRETARIAT 
(Cabinet Division) 
Islamabad 
 
 
[Ministerial-I Section] 

 
 
T A B L E   O F   C O N T E N T S 
PART A.—GENERAL 
Rule  
 
Page 
1.  Title, commencement and application …………………………………………………. 
1 
2.  Definitions………………………………………………………..…………………… 
1-2 
3.  Allocation of Business……………………………………………..……………….…. 
3 
4.  Organization of Divisions………………...…………………………………………… 
3 
5.  Transaction of Business………………………………………………………………. 
4-5 
6.  Individual and collective responsibility…………………………….………………… 
5 
7.  Orders and instruments, agreements and contracts…………………………………… 
5-6 
PART B.—CONSULTATION AMONG DIVISIONS 
8.  Inter-Division procedure……………………………………………………………… 
6-7 
9.  Secretaries’ Committee……………………………………………………………….. 
7 
10.  Consultation with the Cabinet Division ……………………………………………… 
8 
11.  Consultation with the Establishment Division …………………………..…………… 
8 
12.  Consultation with the Finance Division ……………………………………………… 
9 
13.  Consultation with Foreign Affairs Division ………………………………………….. 
9 
       14. 
Consultation with the Law and Justice Division............................................................ 
9-10 
     14A. 
Consultation with the Revenue Division ……………………..………………………. 
10 
PART C.—REFERENCES TO THE PRIME MINISTER AND THE PRESIDENT 
15.  Reference to the Prime Minister ……..………………………………………………. 
11-12 
    15A. 
Reference to the President…………………………………..………………………… 
12 
PART D.—CABINET PROCEDURE 
16.  Cases to be brought before Cabinet ………………….………………………………. 
12-13 
17.  Method of disposal of Cabinet cases…………………..……………………………… 
13-14 
18.  Manner of submission of Cabinet cases ………………………………………………. 
14-15 
19.  Procedure regarding circulation of Cabinet cases …………………………………….. 
15 
20.  Procedure regarding Cabinet meetings ……………………………………………….. 
15-17 
21.  Procedure regarding Inter-Provincial Conference……………………………..……… 
17 
22.  Procedure regarding National Economic Council………………………….…………. 
17 
23.  Procedure regarding Committees of Cabinet, and National Economic Council ……… 
17 
24.  Action on decisions of the Cabinet, National Economic Council or their Committees etc.… 18-19 
25.  Periodical Reports of Activities of Divisions ………………..………………………. 
19 
26.  Annual Report………………………………………………………………………… 
19 
PART E.—LEGISLATION 
27.  Official Bills ……………………………………………….………………………… 
20-21 
28.  Non-Official Bills ………………………………………………………..………….. 
21 
29.  Official and non-official amendments to Bills………………………..……………… 
22 
30.  Ordinances …………………………………………………………………………… 
22 
PART F.—RELATIONS WITH MAJLIS-E-SHOORA (PARLIAMENT) 
31.  Compliance with Rules of Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) ……………………………. 
22 
32.  Summoning of Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) a House or Joint sitting by the President...... 
22 
33.  Prorogation of Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) a House or Joint sitting by the President….. 
22-23 
34.  Summoning and Prorogation of National Assembly by the Speaker ……………………… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23 

 
35.  Summoning and Prorogation of the Senate by the Chairman……………………..……… 
23 
36.  Review of official and non-official business……………………………………………… 
23 
37.  Provisional forecast of official and non-official business……………………………….… 
23 
38.  Orders of the Day…………………………………………………………….……………. 
23 
39.  Transmission of Bills, etc ……………………………………………………..…….......… 
24 
40.  Action by Divisions ……………………………………………….………………………. 
 
24 
41.  Introductions of Bills, etc…………………………………………………..…………….… 
24-25 
42.  Assent to Bills ……………………………………………………………………… 25 
    42A. 
Reconsideration of Bills by Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) ……………….……..… 
25 
43.  Resolutions ……………………………………………………….………………… 25 
44.  Motions ………………………………...…………………………………………… 26 
45.  Questions …………………………………………………………………………… 26 
46.  Budget ……………………………………………………………………………… 26 
47.  Committees of Assembly or Senate ………………………………………………… 26 
PART G.—RELATIONS WITH PROVINCES  
48.  Directions to the Governors ……………………………………………………..… 
27 
49.  Obligations of Provinces and Federation ………………………………………..… 
27 
50.  
     50A. 
Conferment of powers and imposition of duties upon a Province …………..…..… 
Secretariat of Council of Common Interests………………………………….……. 
27 
27 
PART H.—EMERGENCY PROVISIONS  
51.  Proclamation of Emergency on account of war, internal disturbance, etc………..… 27 
52.  Failure of constitutional machinery in a Province …………………………….…… 28 
53.  Proclamation in case of financial stringency ………………..……………………… 28 
54.  Revocation of Proclamation, etc ……………………………………….…………… 28 
PART I.—MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
55.  Protection and communication of official information ……………..……………… 28 
56.  Channels of communications ……………………………….……………………… 28-29 
57.  Relaxation …………………………………………………………………………… 29 
58.  Repeal …………………………………………..…………………………………… 29 
SCHEDULES  
Schedule I.       List of Ministries and Divisions …………………………………………… 
30-31 
Schedule II.       Distribution of business among the Divisions ……………………….…..… 32-70 
Schedule III       List of Attached Departments declared as such by the Federal Government..   
                                  
71-73 
Schedule IV     List of officers authorized to make and execute orders and other instruments  
     in the name of the President …………………………………………….…..… 74 
Schedule 5A.     List of cases to be submitted to the Prime Minister for his orders……….…… 75-77 
Schedule VB.     List of cases requiring orders of the President on the advice of the Prime    
     Minister……………………………………………………………………….. 78-80 
Schedule VI.      List of cases to be submitted to the President for his orders in his discretion… 81 
Schedule VII.     Cases and papers to be submitted to the President for information………..… 82 
 
 
 
(ii) 

 
4
RULES OF BUSINESS 
 
In exercise of the powers conferred by Articles 90 and 99 of the Constitution of the 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan, the Federal Government is pleased to make the following 
rules:- 
 
 
 
 
PART A.--GENERAL 
 
1. 
1Title, commencement and application.--(1) These rules may be called the 
"Rules of Business, 1973." 
 
(2) 
They shall come into force on the fourteenth day of August 1973. 
2(3) 
They shall also apply, mutatis mutandis, when the business of the Government 
is conducted through automated or digitalized applications, platforms or systems. 
 
2. 
Definitions.--(1) In these rules, unless there is anything repugnant in the 
subject or context: 
 
(i) 
"Assembly" means the National Assembly; 
 
(ii) 
"Attached Department" means a Department which has direct relation 
with a Division and has been declared as such by the Federal 
Government; 
 
(iii) 
"business" means all work done by the Federal Government; 
 
(iv) 
"Cabinet" means and consists of the Prime Minister and the Federal 
Ministers; 
 
(v) 
"case" means a particular matter under consideration and includes all 
papers relating to it and required to enable the matter to be disposed of, 
viz., correspondence and notes, and also any previous paper on the 
subject or subjects covered by it or connected with it; 
 
(vi) 
"Division" means a self-contained administrative unit responsible for 
the conduct of business of the Federal Government in a distinct and 
specified sphere and declared as such by the Federal Government; 
 
(vii) 
"Federal Secretariat" means the Divisions or the Ministries when 
referred to collectively; 
 
(viii) "Gazette" means the official Gazette of Pakistan, 
 
(ix) 
"Government" means the Federal Government;  
 
3(x) 
"Leader of the House" means the Member of the Parliament appointed 
by the Prime Minister to regulate official business in the Assembly, the 
Senate or the Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) in joint sitting, as the case 
may be; 
(xi) 
"Local administration" means the agency through which the President 
administers a territory subject to his direct administrative control; 
 
                                                          
1 Substituted vide SRO 687(I)/2026 dated 24-04-26 
2 Added vide SRO 687(I)/2026 dated 24-04-26 
3 Substituted vide SRO 623(I)/2021 dated 27-05-2021 

 
5
(xii) 
"Member" means a member of the Assembly or the Senate; 
(xiii) "Minister" means the Federal Minister-in-Charge of the Ministry to 
which a particular case pertains and includes a Minister without 
portfolio and a Minister of State; 
 
(xiv) 
"Ministry" means a Division or group of Divisions constituted as a 
Ministry; 
 
1(xv) "Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament)” shall having the same meaning as 
assigned thereto in Article 50 of the Constitution of the Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan; 
 
(xvi) 
"Provincial Government" means the Government of a Province of 
Pakistan; 
 
(xvii) "Schedule" means a Schedule to these rules; 
 
(xviii) "Secretary" means the 2[Secretary General], Principal Secretary, 
Secretary, 3[Special Secretary] or Acting Secretary to the Government 
of Pakistan in charge of a Division or a Ministry, and where there is no 
Secretary, the Additional Secretary, Senior Joint Secretary or Joint 
Secretary in charge of the Division or the Ministry; 
 
(xix) 
"Section" means a basic working unit in a Division as determined by 
the Government; 
 
(xx) 
"Subordinate Office" means a Federal Government office other than a 
Ministry, Division or an Attached Department. 
 
(2) 
All words and expressions used in these rules but not defined, have the 
same meaning as in the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan. 
 
                                                          
1 Substituted vide SRO 623(I)/2021 dated 27-05-2021 
2 Inserted vide S.R.O. 226(I)/2010 (F.No.4-4/2007-Min-I), dated 02.4.2010 
3 Inserted vide SRO 428 (1)/2018 dated 04-04-2018 
 

 
6
3. 
Allocation of Business.--(1) The Federal Secretariat shall comprise the 
Ministries and Divisions shown in Schedule I. 
 
 
(2) 
The Prime Minister may, whenever necessary, constitute a new Ministry 
consisting of one or more Divisions. 
 
 
(3) 
The business of government shall be distributed among the Divisions in the 
manner indicated in Schedule II: 
 
 
 
Provided that the distribution of business or the constitution of the Division 
may be modified from time to time by the Prime Minister. 
 
 
(4) 
The Prime Minister shall allocate amongst his Ministers the business of 
Government by assigning several Divisions specified in Schedule I to the charge of a 
Minister: 
 
 
 
1Provided that a Ministry or a Division not so assigned shall be in the charge 
of the Prime Minister who for smooth functioning of the Division may also delegate his 
functions as Minister-in-Charge, either wholly or partly, to a Minister of State and an Adviser 
to the Prime Minister: 
 
 
 
Provided further that more than one Division may be assigned to a Minister. 
 
 
4. 
Organization of Divisions.-- (1) Each Division shall consist of a Secretary to 
Government and of such other officials subordinate to him as the Government may 
determine: 
 
 
 
Provided that the same person may be Secretary of more than one Division. 
 
 
(2) 
The Secretary shall be the official head of the Division and shall be 
responsible for its efficient administration and discipline and for the proper conduct of 
business assigned to the Division under rule 3 (3) and for the due execution of the sanctioned 
policy 
3) 
The Secretary shall organize the Division into a number of working units to be 
known as Sections: 
 
 
 
Provided that a unit which does not conform to a Section may be organized 
otherwise than as a Section on a permanent basis, in consultation with the Establishment 
Division. 
 
 
Note:- In the case of an extraordinary working unit such as a research cell or 
an Office of the Officer on Special Duty, it will be sufficient if the 
Establishment Division is informed of the composition of the unit. 
 
            (4)  
The Attached Departments as allocated to the various Divisions are shown in 
Schedule III. 
 
 
 (5) 
The business of Government, other than the business done in the Federal 
Secretariat or the Attached Departments, shall be conducted through such agencies and 
offices as the Prime Minister may determine from time to time. 
 
 
 
(6) 
There may be a Special Assistant or Special Assistants to the Prime Minister 
with such status and functions as may be determined by the Prime Minister. 
 
 
                                                          
1 Substituted vide SRO 389(I)/2025 dated 24th March, 2025 

 
7
 
 
 
5. 
Transaction of Business.--(1) No important policy decision shall be taken except 
with the approval of the Prime Minister. 
 
 
(2) 
It shall be the duty of a Minister to assist the Prime Minister in the formulation 
of policy. 
              
         1(2A) 
The Prime Minister may, from amongst the Ministers, designate a Minister to 
be the Deputy Prime Minister and assign him such functions as he may deem appropriate for 
efficient performance of the functions of the Federal Government. In case a Minister had 
already been so designated, before the coming into force of this Notification, he shall be 
deemed to have been designated under this sub-rule. 
  
 
(3) 
The Minister shall keep the Prime Minister informed of any important case 
disposed of by him without reference to the Prime Minister. 
 
 
(4) 
No decisions of policy taken by the Prime Minister shall be varied, reversed or 
infringed without consulting him. 
 
 
(5) 
Subject to sub-rule (1), the Minister shall be responsible for policy concerning 
his Division. 
 
 
(6) 
No officer other than a Secretary, Additional Secretary or Joint Secretary shall 
take the initiative in approaching a Minister in connection with the official business. If an 
Additional Secretary or Joint Secretary holds an oral discussion with his Minister, he shall 
communicate the points made during discussion to the Secretary at the first possible 
opportunity. 
 
 
(7)  
The Head of an Attached Department may see a Minister: 
 
 
 
Provided that the Secretary of the Division concerned shall be informed of the 
proposed interview so that he can be present if he so desires. 
 
 
(8) 
The business of the Division shall ordinarily be disposed of by or under the 
authority of the Minister-in-Charge. 
 
 
(9) 
The Secretary shall -- 
 
 
 
(a) 
assist the Minister-in-Charge in the formulation of policy; 
 
 
 
(b) 
duly execute the sanctioned policy; 
 
 
 
(c) 
submit all proposals for legislation to the Cabinet with the approval 
 
 
 
of the Minister. 
 
(d) 
keep the Minister-in-Charge generally informed of the working of the 
Division and of any important case disposed of without reference to 
the Minister; 
2(e) 
unless any other official stands notified in this behalf, be the 
principal accounting officer for the purpose of clause (q) of section 
2 
of 
the 
Public 
Finance 
Management 
Act, 
2019  
(V of 2019); 
 
(f) 
subject to the provisions of these rules and with the approval of the 
Minister-in-Charge, issue standing orders laying down the manner of 
disposal of cases in the Division, including the distribution of work 
amongst the officers of his Division and such orders may specify the 
cases or class of cases which may be disposed of by an officer 
                                                          
1 Inserted vide SRO 2062(I)/2024 dated 18-12-2024 
2 Substituted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 

 
8
subordinate to him; and 
 
(g) 
be responsible for the careful observance of these rules and, where he 
considers that there has been any material departure from them, either 
in his own or any other Division, he shall bring the matter to the notice 
of the Minister-in-Charge and, if necessary, to the notice of the Prime 
Minister or the Cabinet. 
 
(10) 
When the Secretary submits a case to the Minister, the latter may accept the 
proposals or views of the Secretary or may over-rule him. The Secretary will normally defer 
to the decision of the Minister and implement it. In case, however, the Secretary feels that the 
decision of the Minister is manifestly wrong and will cause gross injustice or undue hardship, 
he may state his reasons and re-submit the case to the Minister. If the Minister still adheres to 
his earlier decision and the matter is important enough, the Secretary shall request the 
Minister to refer the case to the Prime Minister and the Minister shall so refer the case for 
orders of the Prime Minister. If the case is not referred to the Prime Minister, the Secretary 
shall submit it directly to the Prime Minister with observations of the Minister-in-Charge. 
 
 
(11) 
The Minister-in-Charge shall be responsible for conducting the business of the 
Division in the Assembly. 
 
       
(11A) Verbal orders given by a functionary of the Government should as a matter of 
routine be reduced to writing and submitted to the issuing authority. If time permits, the 
confirmation shall invariably be taken before initiating action. However, in an exigency 
where action is required to be taken immediately or it is not possible to obtain written 
confirmation of the orders before initiating action, the functionary to whom the verbal orders 
are given shall take the action required and at the first available opportunity obtain the 
requisite confirmation while submitting to the issuing authority a report of the action taken by 
him. 
 
(12) 
If any doubt or dispute arises as to the interpretation of these rules or the 
Division to which a case properly pertains, the case shall be referred to the Cabinet Division, 
whose decision shall be final. The Cabinet Division shall obtain the orders of the Prime 
Minister where necessary. 
 
 
(13) 
Instructions ancillary to these rules shall, whenever considered desirable, be 
issued by the Cabinet Division: 
 
      Provided that the special or general orders required to be framed by the Divisions in terms 
of these rules may be issued by them after consulting the Cabinet Division. 
            
 
(14) 
If any order passed happens to contravene a law, rule or policy, it shall be the 
duty of the next below officer to point out this to the authority passing the order. 
 
 
(15) 
Detailed instructions for the manner of disposal of business in the Federal 
Secretariat shall be issued by the Establishment Division in the form of Secretariat 
Instructions. 
 
 
6. 
Individual and collective responsibility.-- The Cabinet shall collectively be 
responsible for the advice tendered to, or the executive orders issued in the name of the 
President whether by an individual Minister or as a result of decision by the Cabinet; but the 
Minister shall assume primary responsibility for the disposal of business pertaining to his 
portfolio. 
 
 
7. 
Orders and instruments, agreements and contracts.--(1) Subject to Article 
173, all executive actions of the Government shall be expressed to be taken in the name of the 
President. 
 
 
Note.- The use of the expression "Federal Government" in relation to 
the Provincial Governments and "Government of Pakistan" in relation 
to foreign Government shall be in order. 
 

 
9
 
(2) 
The officers listed in Schedule IV may authenticate by signature all orders and 
other instruments made and executed in the name of the President: 
 
 
 
Provided that in certain cases an officer may be so authorised for a particular occasion 
by order of the Prime Minister. 
 
 
(3) 
Instructions regarding the manner of authentication of orders and instruments 
in connection with the representation of Pakistan in foreign countries or at international 
conferences and of international agreements and treaties shall be issued by the Foreign 
Affairs Division. 
 
 
(4) 
Instructions for the making of contracts on behalf of the President and the 
execution of such contracts and all assurances of property shall be issued by the Law and 
Justice Division. 
 
PART B.-CONSULTATION AMONG DIVISIONS 
 
 
8. 
Inter-Division procedure.-(1) When the subject of a case concerns more than 
one Division, the Division in charge shall be responsible for consulting the other Division 
concerned and no orders shall issue, nor shall the case be submitted to the Cabinet or the 
Prime Minister, until it has been considered by all the Divisions concerned, and their views 
obtained. Such consultation shall take place as early as may be practicable: 
 
 
Provided that in cases of urgency and with the approval of the Prime Minster, this 
requirement may be dispensed with, but the case shall at the earliest opportunity thereafter be 
brought to the notice of the other Divisions concerned. 
 
 
(1A) 
The Division should normally furnish its views to the referring Division 
within 1[three working days] of the receipt of reference. If more time is required because of 
the complicated nature of the case, the referring Division should invariably be informed of 
the position by the end of 2[three working days] indicating, simultaneously, the time by which 
the reply would be sent. 
 
 
(2) 
In the event of a difference of opinion between the Divisions concerned, the 
Minister primarily concerned shall try to resolve the difference in consultation with the other 
Ministers concerned. If no agreement is reached and the Minister primarily concerned desires 
to press the case, the case shall be submitted to the Prime Minister or, if the Prime Minister so 
desires, to the Cabinet: 
 
 
 
Provided that in a matter of urgency, the Minister primarily concerned may submit the 
case to the Prime Minister at any stage: 
 
 
 
Provided further that where the Prime Minister is the Minister-in-Charge, the final 
views of other Divisions concerned shall be obtained before the case is submitted to the 
Prime Minister. 
 
 
(3) 
When a case is referred by one Division to another for consultation, all 
relevant facts and the points necessitating the reference shall be clearly brought out. The 
reference should be complete in all respects to eliminate avoidable back references on the 
same issue(s). Similarly replies given by the Division should also be complete in all respects 
and cover all the points raised by the referring Division. 
 
 
(4) 
Even where consultation is not required, a Division may, for purposes of 
information, pass copies of a communication received by it, or show a case, to such other 
Division as it considers would be interested in, or would profit by it: 
 
 
Provided that copies of classified documents shall be made and distributed only in  
accordance with  the  instructions  issued  by  the  Cabinet  Division  in accordance with rule 
                                                          
1 Substituted vide SRO 687(I)/2026 dated 24-04-26 
2 Substituted vide SRO 687(I)/2026 dated 24-04-26 

 
10
55(2): 
 
Provided further that copies of cypher telegrams received or dispatched by the 
Pakistan Crypto Centre shall be distributed in accordance with the standing orders issued by 
the Foreign Affairs Division in consultation with the Defence Division and the Cabinet 
Division. 
 
 
(5) 
A Minister may ask to see a case of another Division if it is required for the 
disposal of a case in his Division. The Minister for Finance may ask to see a case of any 
Division in which a financial consideration is involved. While making such request the 
Minister shall give reasons for which the case is called for and shall be dealt with under the 
general or special orders of the Minister-in-Charge of the other Division. If, for any reason, 
the case or relevant extracts from it, cannot be made available the Minister of the Division 
shall explain the position to the Minister making the request or bring the matter to the notice 
of the Prime Minister, if necessary. 
 
(6) 
The Prime Minister may call for a case from any Division. 
 
 
(7) 
If a Minister desires any further action to be taken on the case of another 
Division, he shall take up the matter with the Minister of that Division. 
 
 
19. 
Secretaries' Committee.-(1)     There shall be a Secretaries' Committee  to  
discuss   matters referred  to it by  a  Division, a Minister-in-Charge, the Prime Minister or 
the Cabinet, in which collective experience and collective wisdom of the senior officers could 
be consulted, to the benefit of the subject under consideration. 
 
 
(2) 
All cases, wherein two or more Divisions have different point of view, may be 
considered by the Secretaries' Committee for its resolution or firming up clear 
recommendations on the issues, before being submitted to the Prime Minister or the Cabinet. 
 
 
(3) 
All policy matters pertaining to the career progression, service structure and 
terms and conditions of civil servant may be placed before the Secretaries' Committee for 
eliciting views and recommendation before submission to the Prime Minister or the Cabinet. 
 
 
            (4) 
The Cabinet Secretary, at least once in a quarter, shall present before the 
Cabinet a resume of the decisions and recommendations made by Secretaries' Committee on 
various issues. 
 
 
(5) 
In a matter discussed in the Secretaries’ Committee, if the Secretary of a 
Division has agreed to a proposal, it shall not be necessary to consult his Division again on 
that proposal. 
 
 
(6) 
When a matter is referred to a Committee or working group and a Division is 
represented therein by an officer of or above the rank of Joint Secretary, the agreed decision 
of the Committee or working group shall be treated as final and shall not be subjected to 
further scrutiny in that Division. 
 
 
(7) 
The Secretaries’ Committee shall meet at least once a month unless there are 
no items for discussion. 
 
 
(8) 
Other instructions regarding the submission of cases to the Secretaries’ 
Committee shall be issued by the Cabinet Division.   
 
 
 
                                                          
1 Substituted vide SRO 623(I)/2021 dated 27-05-2021 

 
11
 
10. 
Consultation with the Cabinet Division.-- (1) No Division shall, without 
previous consultation with the Cabinet Division, issue or authorise the issue of any orders 
which involve,- 
 
(a) 
the interpretation of these rules; 
 
(b) 
a change in the allocation of business between the various Divisions of 
a Ministry; and1 
 
(c) 
the strength, terms and conditions of service of the personal staff of 
Ministers, Ministers of State, Special Assistants to the Prime Minister 
and other dignitaries who enjoy the rank and status of a Minister or 
Minister of State.2 
 
(d) 
Omitted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-24. 
 
 
(2) 
Proposals regarding any directions by the President to the Governor of a 
Province under clause (1) of Article 145 shall be submitted to the President by the Division 
concerned but a copy of the Presidential directive will be supplied to the Cabinet Division. 
 
 
(3) 
The Divisions concerned shall obtain clearance of the Cabinet Division to the 
proposals for the sending of delegations which are not in conformity with the procedure laid 
down by that Division regarding the categorization of international conferences. 
 
11. 
Consultation with the Establishment Division.-- No Division shall, without 
previous consultation with the Establishment Division, issue, or authorize the issue of, any 
orders, other than orders in pursuance of any general or special delegation made by the 
Establishment Division, which involve – 
 
(a) &(b)  Deleted vide Cabinet Division Memo. No.104/59/78-Min.I, 
 
dated 5-7-1979. 
 
 
(c) 
Appointment to a post in BS-20 and above and equivalent whether by 
initial appointment or promotion or transfer. 
 
(d) 
a change in the terms and conditions of service of Federal civil 
servants; 
 
(e) 
a change in the statutory rights and privileges of any Federal 
Government servant; 
 
(f) 
Omitted vide SRO No.246 (I)/2001, dated 26.4.2001. 
 
(g) 
Omitted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-24.  
 
(h) 
the interpretation of rules and orders made by the Establishment 
Division; and  
 
(i) 
rules for recruitment to any post or service, including the question of 
removing a post or service from the purview of the Federal Public 
Service Commission for the purposes of recruitment. 
 
12. 
Consultation with the Finance Division.- (1) No Division shall, without 
previous consultation with the Finance Division, authorise the issue of any orders, other than 
orders in pursuance of any general or special delegation made by the Finance Division, which  
will affect directly or indirectly the finances of the Federation or which in particular  
                                                          
1 Inserted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 
2 Substituted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 

 
12
involve -- 
 
(a) 
relinquishment, remission or assignment of revenue, actual or 
potential, or grant of a guarantee against it; 
 
(b) 
expenditure for which no provision exists in the budget or for which no 
sanction exists; 
 
(c) 
[Omitted vide Cabinet Division Notification No.4-11/91-Min-I dated 
22.10.1991.]; 
 
 
 
(d) 
floatation of loan; 
 
 
 
(e) 
re-appropriation within budget grant; 
 
(f) 
alteration in the method of compilation of accounts, or of the budget 
estimates; 
 
 
(g) 
receipt or expenditure of foreign exchange unless already allocated; 
 
(h) 
a change in the terms and conditions of service of Government 
servants on their statutory rights and privileges, which have financial 
implications; 
 
 
 
(i) 
interpretation of rules made by the Finance Division; and 
 
(j) 
omitted vide Cabinet Division Notification No.4-14/98-Min.I dated 
01.12.98. 
 
(2) 
No proposal to which the previous concurrence of the Finance Division is 
required shall, so long as concurrence is refused, be proceeded with. If a Minister cannot 
reach agreement with the Minister for Finance and desires to press the proposal, he shall 
submit it to the Prime Minister or, if the Prime Minister so desires to the Cabinet. Formal 
orders shall not issue until the Finance Division has given its scrutiny to the details of the 
proposal, where no such details have been supplied with the proposal. 
 
(3) 
Except to the extent that power may have been delegated to the Divisions 
under the rules framed by the Finance Division, every order of an administrative Division 
conveying a sanction to be enforced in audit shall be communicated to the audit authorities 
through the Finance Division. 
 
 
 
 
 
13. 
Consultation with the Foreign Affairs Division.-- The Foreign Affairs 
Division shall, subject to orders in pursuance of any general or special delegation made by 
that Division, be consulted on all matters which affect the foreign policy of Pakistan, or the 
conduct of its foreign relations. 
 
 
 
 
14. 
Consultation with the Law and Justice Division-- (1) The Law and Justice 
Division shall be consulted— 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
on all legal questions arising out of any case; 
 
 
 
(b) 
on the interpretation of any law; 
 
 
(c) 
before the issue of or authorization of the issue of an order, rule, 
regulation, by-law, notification, etc. in exercise of statutory powers; 
 
 
 
(d) 
deleted vide Cabinet Division No.104/10/76-Min, dated 26-3-1976. 
 

 
13
(e) 
before instituting criminal or civil proceedings in a court of law in 
which the Government is involved; 
 
(f) 
whenever criminal or civil proceedings are instituted against the 
Government at the earliest possible stage; and 
 
 (g) 
before the appointment of a legal adviser in any Division or any office 
or corporation under its administrative control and the Law and Justice 
Division will make its recommendations after consultation with the 
Attorney General. 
 
 (1A) A Division may, for compelling reasons for a particular case, engage a private 
counsel and for that purpose shall refer the case to Law and Justice Division 
which may, after consultation with the Attorney General, allow engagement of 
such counsel on payment of fee by the Division concerned.  
 
 
(2) 
No Division shall consult, the Attorney General except through the Law and 
Justice Division and in accordance with the procedure laid down by that Division. 
 
 
Provided that for the purpose of settlement of its disputes through arbitration at 
national and international level, the Division concerned may make direct consultation with 
the Attorney-General for Pakistan.   
 
 
 
(3) 
If there is disagreement between the views of the Attorney General and the 
Law and Justice Division, the case shall be submitted to the Minister for Law and Justice for 
opinion. If the Minister disagrees with the Attorney General, the case shall be referred to the 
Prime Minister for orders who may refer the matter to the Cabinet if he so desires. 
 
 
 
(4) 
For any proposed legislation, the Law and Justice Division shall be consulted 
in accordance with rules 27 to 30. 
  
 
 
(5) 
Bills or Ordinances received from the Provincial Governments or Governors 
requiring assent or instructions of the President shall be examined in the Division concerned 
and shall be submitted to the President through the Law and Justice Division. 
 
 
      
14A. Consultation with Revenue Division.-  (1)  No Division shall, without previous 
consultation with the Revenue Division, authorise the issue of any orders, other than orders in 
pursuance of any general or special delegation made by the Revenue Division, which will 
affect directly or indirectly the collection of revenue from federal taxes, levy of taxes, duties, 
cesses or fees.  
 
PART C.--REFERENCES TO THE PRIME MINISTER 
AND THE PRESIDENT 
 
 
15. 
Reference to the Prime Minister.-(1) No order shall be issued without the 
approval of the Prime Minister in- 
 
(a) 
cases involving important policy or departure from important policy; 
 
Note.- Departure from policy includes departure from a previous 
decision of the Cabinet or the Prime Minister. 
 
(b) 
cases involving directions to a Governor under Article 145 and to a 
Provincial Government under Article 149; 

 
14
 
(c) 
cases where it is proposed that the Federal Government undertake the 
implementation of an international agreement relating to a subject in 
the provincial field; 
 
 
 
 
(d) 
cases of Awards-Decorations in recognition of gallantry and academic 
distinction; 
 
 (e) 
cases relating to petitions addressed to the Prime Minister which  
are neither withheld under instructions for the transmission of such 
petitions to the Prime Minister nor accepted; 
 
(f) 
cases relating to mercy petitions against sentences of death passed by 
Courts requiring the exercise of President's prerogative of pardon; 
 
 
 
 
(g) 
cases enumerated in Schedule V-A; and 
 
 
(h) 
cases involving sanction for the prosecution of the holder of a post 
referred to in Schedule V-A. 
 
 (2)   A case submitted to the Prime Minister for his orders shall include a self-
contained, concise and objective summary stating the relevant facts and the points for 
decision prepared on the same lines as those prescribed in these rules for a summary for the 
Cabinet, except that only one copy will be required which may not be printed. The summary 
shall include the specific recommendations of the Minister-in-Charge and shall be 
accompanied by a draft communication, wherever appropriate.  
 
 
(3) 
Omitted vide Cabinet Division O.M.No.104/8/85-Min-I, dated 4-8-85. 
 
(4) 
In a case in which the Prime Minister's orders are obtained in oral discussion 
by a Minister, Minister of State, Special Assistant to the Prime Minister, Deputy Chairman 
Planning Commission, Secretary or by any other officer of the    Government, a written note 
containing a brief record of the discussion and orders of the Prime Minister shall be 
submitted to the Prime Minister's Office for information of the Prime Minister. 
  
 
(5)   The Prime Minister shall: 
 
(a) 
communicate to the President all decisions of the Cabinet relating to 
the administration of the affairs of the Federation and proposals for 
legislation; 
 
(b) 
furnish such information relating to the administration of affairs of the 
Federation and proposals for legislation as the President may call for; 
and 
 
(c) 
if the President so requires, submit for consideration of the Cabinet any 
matter on which a decision has been taken by the Prime Minister or a 
Minister but which has not been considered by the Cabinet. 
 
115-A. Reference to the President.--(1)   Notwithstanding the provisions made in 
these rules, where in terms of any provision of the Constitution 2[or under any other statutory 
provision] any function is to be performed or any orders have to be issued by the President or 
his specific approval is required, the Division concerned shall incorporate a paragraph to this 
effect in the summary entitled as "Summary for the Prime Minister". The Prime Minister 
                                                          
1 Inserted Vide Cabinet Division O.M.No.104/8/85-Min.I, dated 04.08.85 
2 Inserted vide SRO 623(I)/2021 dated 27-05-2021 

 
15
shall render his advice and submit the case to the President. After the President has seen and 
approved the case, it shall be returned to the Prime Minister. The cases to which this sub-rule 
applies are enumerated in Schedule V-B. 
 
   
 (2)  
Notwithstanding the provisions made in these rules, where in terms of any 
provisions of the Constitution, any function is to be performed or any orders have to be 
issued by the President in his discretion, the Division concerned shall submit the case to the 
President through the Prime Minister in the form of a self-contained, concise and objective 
summary entitled as "Summary for the President" stating the relevant facts and points for 
decision prepared on the same lines as prescribed in these  rules  for  a  Summary  for  the  
Cabinet, except  that  only  one copy will be required which may  not be printed. This 
procedure will not, however, be applicable where the President has conveyed the decision to 
the Prime Minster for issuing orders in respect of cases in his discretion. The cases to which 
this sub-rule applies are enumerated in Schedule VI. 
 
(3) 
The cases and papers referred to in Schedule VII shall be submitted to the 
President for his information. 
 
PART D.--CABINET PROCEDURE 
 
 
 
16. 
Cases to be brought before the Cabinet.--(1)  The following cases shall be 
brought before the Cabinet:- 
 
 
(a) 
proposals for legislation, official or non-official, including money bills; 
 
 
 
 
(b) 
promulgation and revocation of Ordinances; 
 
 
(c) 
the budgetary position and proposals before the presentation of an 
Annual Budget Statement and a Supplementary Budget Statement or 
an Excess Budget Statement under Articles 80 and 84; 
 
(d) 
proposals for levy, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any 
tax and floatation of loans; 
 
 
(e) 
a reference to the Supreme Court for advice on a question of law under 
clause (1) of Article 186; 
 
(f) 
generation of electricity and laying of inter-provincial transmission 
lines; 
 
(g) 
omitted vide S.R.O 368(1)/2010 dated 1st June, 2010;  
 
1(h) 
proposals for signing of negotiated instruments with foreign countries 
and approval for ratification of the instruments: 
 
 
Provided that all proposals for initiation of negotiation and for entering into any 
cultural or other agreements with any foreign government shall, in the first instance, be 
approved in principle by Minister-in-Charge of the Division concerned and actual 
negotiations shall be initiated only after such approval: 
 
 
Provided further that decisions regarding the composition of all delegations, except 
those for which important briefs are required, to attend meetings of international bodies may 
be taken by mutual consultation between the Minister and the Minister for Finance, but the 
approval of the Prime Minister  shall be obtained-- 
 
(i) 
where the delegation is sponsored by a Division under the direct 
charge of the Prime Minister or a Division or Divisions under the 
charge of the Minister for Finance; or 
 
                                                          
1 Substituted vide SRO 910 (1)/2017 dated 8-9-2017(F.No.4-2/2016-Min-I) 
 

 
16
 
 
(ii) 
where a Minister is proposed to be included in the delegation: 
 
 
Provided further that a decision regarding the opening of an honorary consulate 
abroad may be taken by the Foreign Affairs Division in consultation with the Commerce 
Division. 
 
(i) 
important reports and documents required to be laid before the  
            Assembly or Senate; 
 
 
1(j) 
cases involving a significant impact on political, economic and 
administrative policies; 
 
 
Note.- Cases of this nature shall first be brought to the notice of the 
Prime Minister by the Minister-in-Charge. The Prime Minister will 
decide whether any such case should be brought before the Cabinet. 
 
 
(k) 
case which the Minister-in-Charge considers important enough for 
discussion in the Cabinet; 
 
 
(l) 
other cases required to be referred to the Cabinet under the   
 
 
provisions of these rules;  
 
(m) 
any case desired by the Prime Minister to be referred to the Cabinet; 
and 
 
2(n) 
appointments required to be made by the Government under any law 
for the time being in force. 
 
 
 
(2) 
Omitted vide S.R.O 623(I)/2021 (F.No.4-11/2019-Min-I), dated 27.5.2021. 
 
17. 
Method of disposal of Cabinet cases.--(1) Cases referred to the Cabinet shall 
be disposed of-- 
 
 
 
(a) 
by discussion at a meeting of the Cabinet; or 
 
 
 
 
(b) 
by circulation amongst Ministers; or 
 
  
 
(c) 
by discussion at a meeting of a committee of the Cabinet: 
 
 
 
Provided that the decisions of the Committee shall be ratified by the             
Cabinet unless the Cabinet has authorised otherwise. 
 
 
The Secretary to the Cabinet (hereinafter referred to as the "Cabinet Secretary") shall, 
under the general or special orders of the Prime Minister, indicate the manner in which a case 
shall be disposed of. 
 
 
 
(2) 
Committees of the Cabinet may be constituted, and their terms of reference 
and membership laid down by the Cabinet or the Prime Minister. Such Committees may be 
standing or special committees; accordingly as they are appointed to deal with a class of 
cases or a specific case. 
 
 
 
3(3) 
Upon consideration of a case in the Cabinet, the Cabinet, may constitute 
committees to further deliberate on the issue and suggest further course of action. The 
committee constituted under this sub-rule shall be distinct from the Cabinet Committees 
constituted under sub-rule (2) and, apart from the Cabinet members, may also have other 
members, as the Cabinet may deem appropriate: 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 Substituted vide SRO 623(I)/2021 dated 27-05-2021 
2 Added vide SRO 623(I)/2021 dated 27-05-2021 
3 Added vide SRO 623(I)/2021 dated 27-05-2021 

 
17
 
 
Provided that report or recommendations of such committees, as the case may 
be, shall invariably be presented before the Cabinet for consideration and a decision in the 
matter, if so required.   
 
 
18. 
Manner of submission of Cabinet cases.--(1)     In respect of all cases to   be 
submitted to the Cabinet, the Secretary of the Division concerned shall transmit to the 
Cabinet Secretary a concise, lucid and printed memorandum of the case (hereinafter referred 
to as the "summary"), giving the background and relevant facts, the points for decision and 
the recommendations of the Minister-in-Charge. In the event of views of the Division being 
different from the views of the Minister-in-Charge, both the views shall be included in the 
summary: 
 
 
[Proviso deleted vide S.R.O 226(I)/2010 (Cabinet Division’s F.No. 4-4/2007, dated 
2nd April, 2010] 
 
 
 
(2) 
In the case of a proposed legislation to which approval is sought in principle, 
the summary shall bring out clearly the main issues to be legislated upon. 
 
 
(3) 
The summary shall be self-contained as far as possible, not exceeding two 
printed pages and may include as appendices only such relevant papers as are necessary for 
proper appreciation of the case. 1[Where the proposal involves amendments to any law or set 
of rules, a comparative statement shall be appended, clearly juxtaposing the existing 
provisions with the proposed provisions.] The number of copies of the summary and the form 
in which it is to be drawn up shall be prescribed by the Cabinet Secretary. 
 
(4) 
Where a case concerns more than one Division, the summary shall not be 
submitted to the Cabinet unless it has been considered by all the Divisions concerned. In the 
event of a difference of opinion between them, the points of difference shall be clearly stated 
in the summary, a copy of which shall be sent by the sponsoring Division to other Division 
concerned simultaneously with transmission of the summary to the Cabinet Division. 
  
 
 
(5) 
All draft Bills, Ordinances or Orders shall be submitted to the Cabinet after 
they have been scrutinized by the Law and Justice Division, and no changes shall be made 
therein except in consultation with that Division. 
 
 
(6) 
No case for inclusion in the agenda of a meeting of the Cabinet shall be 
accepted unless it reaches the Cabinet Secretary at least 2[two] clear days in advance of the 
meeting: 
 
 
Provided that, if a case is urgent and is required to be taken up at short notice, the 
Secretary concerned will obtain approval of the Prime Minister for its inclusion in the agenda 
before it is transmitted to the Cabinet Secretary. 
 
 
(7) It shall be the duty of the Cabinet Secretary to satisfy himself that the papers 
submitted by a Secretary are complete and in appropriate form. He may return the case until 
requirements of the rules have been complied with. If the Cabinet Secretary is satisfied that 
the case does not merit consideration of the Cabinet he may advise the matter to be placed 
before an appropriate forum or require it to be submitted to the Prime Minister. 
 
 
19. 
Procedure regarding circulation of Cabinet cases.--(1) When a case is 
circulated to Cabinet for recording opinion, the Cabinet Secretary shall specify the time by 
which opinions should be communicated to him. If a Minister does not communicate his 
opinion by that time, it shall be assumed that he accepts the recommendations contained in 
the summary. 
 
 
(2) 
On expiry of the specified time, the Cabinet Secretary shall submit the 
opinions received to the Prime Minister for decision. 
 
 
(3) 
If the Prime Minister directs that the case shall be discussed at a Cabinet 
                                                          
1 Inserted vide SRO 687(I)/2026 dated 24-04-2026 
2 Substituted vide SRO 687(I)/2026 dated 24-04-2026 

 
18
meeting, the Cabinet Secretary shall circulate the opinions recorded by the Ministers, in the 
form of a supplementary summary. 
 
 
(4) 
Report made to the Cabinet of action taken on its decisions, and other cases 
submitted only for information, shall normally be disposed of by circulation. 
 
 
20. 
Procedure regarding Cabinet Meetings.-(1) Meeting of the Cabinet to 
discuss ordinary business shall normally be held once a week, on a day and time to be 
specified by the Prime Minister. 
 
 
Provided that the Prime Minister may call for a special meeting of the Cabinet at any 
time and on any day to discuss urgent business. 
 
(1A)  Meetings of the Cabinet will be attended by the Federal Ministers. 
 
Provided that the Prime Minister may require the Ministers of State, Advisers and 
Special Assistants to the Prime Minister and other dignitaries to attend any or all meetings of 
the Cabinet by special invitation. 
 
 
 
 
(2) 
Ministers shall so arrange their tours that they are able to attend the weekly 
Cabinet meetings, unless they have obtained the Prime Minister's permission to absent 
themselves, in which case their Secretary should invariably be in attendance at the Cabinet 
meeting if any item relating to his Division is on the agenda of the Cabinet meeting. 
  
 
 
 
(3) 
The Prime Minister may authorise the holding of Cabinet meetings during his 
absence. 
 
 
(4) 
The Prime Minister shall preside at all Cabinet meetings. In the absence of the 
Prime Minister, a Minister nominated by the Prime Minister shall preside. The  
decisions taken in the Prime Minister's absence shall be subject to the approval of the Prime 
Minister, unless the Cabinet feels that a particular case is so urgent that immediate action may 
be taken in anticipation of the Prime Minister's approval. 
 
(5) 
The Cabinet Secretary shall ordinarily issue to the Ministers, 1[two] days in 
advance of a meeting, a circular showing the cases proposed to be placed on the agenda, 
together with the summaries relating to such cases. In the case of special meetings, the 
agenda may be issued less than 2[two] days in advance. A copy of the agenda, without 
summaries shall also be supplied to the Secretaries of Divisions. 
 
 
(6) 
No case shall be discussed nor any issue raised unless the summary relating to 
it has first been circulated: 
 
 
Provided that the Prime Minister may, in his discretion or at the representation of a 
Minister, dispense with this requirement if he is satisfied that the circumstances were such 
that a working paper could not be supplied and the matter could brook no delay. 
 
 
 
(7) 
The Secretary shall be in attendance at the cabinet meeting for the purpose of 
the case relating to his Division even when his Minister attends that meeting. 
 
 
(8) 
Other officers of the Divisions shall not ordinarily be required to be in 
attendance at the Cabinet meetings except- 
 
(a) 
when information on points within their technical or specialised 
knowledge is required; or 
 
(b) 
when the Minister or the Secretary is unable to attend. In such cases 
any officer may be invited to the meeting by the Cabinet Secretary. 
Such officers may be asked to join the meeting only for the relevant 
case and, after giving the information required, shall withdraw from 
the meeting before discussion is taken up by the Cabinet. 
                                                          
1 Substituted vide SRO 687(I)/2026 dated 24-04-2026 
2 Substituted vide SRO 687(I)/2026 dated 24-04-2026 

 
19
 
 
 
(9) 
If the Secretary of the Division concerned considers that the discussion on a 
case should await the return of the Minister, he may request the Cabinet Secretary for its 
postponement until the return of the Minister. Similarly, the Secretary may request for the 
withdrawal of a case belonging to his Division from the agenda of the Cabinet meeting. 
 
 
(10) 
When a case is taken up by a meeting of the Cabinet, the Prime Minister may 
request the Minister or the Secretary or any other officer of the Ministry concerned who may 
be in attendance in accordance with sub-rule (8), to explain the point or points on which a 
decision is required. 
 
 
 
(11) 
The Cabinet Secretary and or any other officer of the Cabinet Division 
authorized by him shall attend all meetings and prepare- 
 
(a) 
a brief record of the discussion which, in the absence of special 
directions by the Cabinet to the contrary, shall be of an impersonal 
nature; 
 
 
(b) 
a record of the decisions without any statement of the reasons 
therefore. 
 
 
1(12) The Cabinet Secretary shall circulate to the Ministers, and if so desired by the 
Prime Minister, to the Advisers and Special Assistants to the Prime Minister a copy of the 
above record for perusal and return within twenty four hours of issue. 
  
 
 
(13) 
A copy of decision of the Cabinet, and wherever considered necessary of the 
points made during the discussion shall be supplied by the Cabinet Secretary to the Secretary 
of the Division concerned for action under rule 24. 
 
 
(14) 
If a Minister considers that there has been a mistake or omission in recording 
the minutes, he shall point it out to the Cabinet Secretary within 24 hours of the issue of the 
minutes. The Cabinet Secretary shall obtain the orders of the Prime Minister and, if 
necessary, issue a corrigendum, correct the official record in the Cabinet Division and advice 
the Secretary of the Division concerned. 
 
 
(15) 
Where a Minister was unable to attend a Cabinet meeting, and the Secretary 
attended the meeting, the record of the items concerning the Division shall be sent to the 
Secretary. 
 
 
20A. Omitted vide S.R.O 226(I)/2010 (F.No.4-4/2007-Min-I), dated 02.4.2010. 
21. 
[Procedure regarding Inter-Provincial Conference] Omitted vide S.R.O 
No. 724(I)/2011 (F.No.4-9/2011-Min-I), dated 28.07.2011. 
  
 
 
22. 
Procedure regarding National Economic Council.--(1)      Meetings of the 
National Economic Council shall be convened by the Cabinet Division under the directions 
of the Prime Minister who shall preside at the meetings. 
 
 
(2) 
The Federal and Provincial Ministers and officials of the Divisions concerned 
and of the Provincial Governments may be associated with the deliberations of the National 
Economic Council as and when considered necessary. 
 
 
(3) 
The provisions of rules 17, 18 and 20 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the 
manner of submission of cases to, and the procedure for the meetings of the National 
                                                          
1 Substituted vide SRO 1171(1)/2018 dated 1st October, 2018 

 
20
Economic Council except that the summary shall reach the Cabinet Division at least 1[five] 
clear days in advance of the commencement of the meeting. 
 
 
(4) 
Other instructions regarding submission of cases to the National Economic 
Council shall be issued by the Cabinet Secretary. 
 
 
2(5) 
There shall be an Executive Committee of the National Economic Council 
(ECNEC) to be appointed by the Prime Minister. The terms of reference of ECNEC shall be 
notified by the Cabinet Division with the approval of the Prime Minister.  
 
 
23. 
Procedure regarding Committees of Cabinet  and National Economic 
Council.--(1) Meetings of a Committee of the Cabinet or of the National Economic Council 
shall be convened by the Cabinet Division under the directions of the Chairman of the 
Committee concerned, who shall preside at the meeting of the Committee. 
 
 
 
(2) 
The members of the Committee shall attend the meetings: 
 
 
Provided that a Federal Minister or a Provincial Minister, where he is a member, if 
unable to attend a meeting, may authorize the Secretary of the Division or Department 
concerned to represent him. 
 
 
(3) 
Officials of the Divisions concerned and of the Provincial Governments may 
be associated with the deliberations of the Committee as and when considered necessary. 
  
 
 
(4) 
The provisions of rules 18, 19 and 20 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the 
manner of submission of cases to, and the procedure for the meeting of the Committee. 
  
 
 
(5) 
Other instructions regarding submission of cases to the Committee shall be 
issued by the Cabinet Secretary. 
 
24. 
Action on decisions of the Cabinet, National Economic Council or their 
Committees, etc.--(1) When a case has been decided by the Cabinet or the National 
Economic Council or their Committees, the Minister-in-Charge shall take prompt action to 
give effect to the decision. 
 
 
(2) 
When the decision is received by the Secretary of the Division concerned, he 
shall- 
 
(a) 
acknowledge the receipt of the decision in the form provided; 
 
(b) 
transmit the decision to his Division for action; 
 
(c) 
keep a register with himself of the decisions received, for the purpose 
of ensuring that prompt and complete action is taken on those 
decisions; and  
 
(d) 
coordinate action with any other Division concerned with the decision. 
 
 
 
(3) 
The Secretary of the Division concerned shall, on receipt of the Cabinet 
decision, communicate it to the Division but shall not forward the original documents. The 
decision shall be formally conveyed as decision of the Federal Government and details to the 
Ministers present at the meeting of the Cabinet, Committee of Cabinet etc., shall not be 
disclosed. 
 
 
 
Note:-The record of the discussion before a decision was taken shall not be 
passed down unless it contains points which require further consideration or 
action in the Division concerned. 
 
                                                          
1 Substituted vide SRO 687(I)/2026 dated 24-04-2026 
2 Added vide SRO 623(I)/2021 dated 27-05-2021 

 
21
 
(4) 
To ensure implementation of the Cabinet decisions, the Secretary of each 
Division shall keep a record of all the decisions conveyed to him and shall watch progress of 
action until it is completed. It shall be his responsibility as Secretary of the Division 
sponsoring the summary to consult or inform any other Divisions concerned, in order to 
ensure full implementation of the decision. 
 
(5) 
The Cabinet Secretary shall watch the implementation of Cabinet decisions, 
and the Secretary in the Division concerned shall supply to the Cabinet Secretary such 
documents as the latter may, by general or special request, require to enable him to complete 
his record of the case. 
 
 
(6) 
The Cabinet Secretary shall maintain the record of each case which shall 
consist of- 
 
(a) 
a copy of all papers issued under rules 19(1), 20(5), 22(3) or 23(4); 
 
 
 
(b) 
a copy of the records prepared under rules 19(2), 20(11) or 23(4); 
 
 
 
(c) 
all documents received under sub-rule (5). 
 
 
(7) 
The Secretaries shall retain in their personal custody the record of Cabinet 
decisions and discussions conveyed to them under rule 20(13), and shall make them over to 
their successors at the time of handing over charge. 
 
 
(8) 
All papers submitted to Cabinet are secret until the Cabinet discussion has 
taken place. Thereafter each secretary shall decide whether the case should continue to be 
classified as secret and inform the Cabinet Division of his decision. 
 
 
 
(9) 
The Ministers shall return to the Cabinet Secretary –  
 
(a) 
the papers issued to them for decision by circulation, immediately after 
recording their opinion; 
 
(b) 
the papers issued to them for decision by discussion in a meeting of the 
Cabinet or Committee of the Cabinet, etc., under rule 20(5), 22(3) or 
23(4), immediately after the discussion has taken place; 
 
(c) 
copies of the record of discussion and decision circulated by the 
Cabinet Secretary under rule 19(1), 20(12), 22(3) or 23(4); 
immediately after they have perused them; and 
 
(d) 
reports of action taken on Cabinet decisions, or other papers circulated 
for information, immediately after perusal. 
 
 
25. 
Periodical reports of activities of Divisions.--(1) Omitted vide SRO 
135(I)/98, dated 3rd March, 1998. 
 
 
 
1(2) 
At the beginning of each financial year, each Division shall, for the 
information of the Cabinet and for general public, prepare and upload on its website as a 
permanent record a Year Book which shall contain-- 
 
(a) 
the details of its activities, achievements and progress during the 
preceding financial year giving only the unclassified information 
which can be used for reference purposes; 
 
(b) 
the programme of activities and targets set out for itself during the 
                                                          
1 Substituted vide SRO 40 (1)/2019 dated 11th January, 2019 

 
22
preceding financial year and the extent to which they have been 
realized; and 
  
 
                    
 
 
 (c) 
the relevant statistics properly tabulated. 
 
 
Note:-  The Secretary of the Division shall ensure that only 
unclassified material is supplied for the Year Book so that the 
information contained therein may be available for the use of 
academics, scholars and other interested. 
 
 
 
1(3) 
Secretary of each Division shall inform the Cabinet Secretary, within 2[sixty] 
days at the end of the financial year under report, about availability of the Year Book, who 
shall disseminate this information to all members of the Cabinet and all Divisions. 
 
 
 
26. 
Annual Report.-(1) There shall be prepared by the Cabinet Division an 
annual report on the observance and implementation of the Principles of Policy in relation to 
the affairs of the Federation in terms of clause (3) of Article 29. 
 
 
 
(2) 
The Law and Justice Division shall cause the report to be laid before each 
House of the Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament). 
 
 
 
 
(3) 
The provisions of rule 25(2) and (3) shall apply for the preparation and 
submission of the report to Cabinet as they apply to a Year Book. 
 
PART E.—LEGISLATION 
 
 
27. 
Official Bills.-(1)   The Division concerned shall be responsible for 
determining the contents of the proposed legislation for consulting the other Divisions 
concerned (including the Finance Division) where necessary, and for obtaining the approval 
of the Cabinet under rule 16(1)(a), to the issues involved, before asking the Law and Justice 
Division to draft the Bill. 
 
 
 
Provided that where the proposed legislation involves only a verbal or formal 
amendment of an existing law, it shall not be necessary to obtain approval of the Cabinet 
before asking the Law and Justice Division to draft it. 
  
 
 
(2) 
When referring the approved legislation to Law and Justice Division for 
drafting, the Division concerned shall send the relevant papers along with a memorandum 
indicating the provisions which are intended to be incorporated in the draft Bill and giving 
the objects of and reasons for those provisions to enable the Law and Justice Division to 
grasp the exact intention of the Division concerned and the full scope of the proposed 
legislation. 
 
 
(3) 
Apart from giving shape to the draft legislation, the Law and Justice Division 
shall advise the Division concerned as to the competence of Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) to 
make a law on the subject to which the proposed legislation relates and whether any legal 
requirements are to be complied with before the Bill is introduced in the Assembly or the 
Senate. 
 
 
(4) 
Whenever consent or recommendations of the Federal Government or 
previous sanction of the President is necessary for the introduction of a Bill it shall be drafted 
by the Law and Justice Division along with the Bill. 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 Substituted vide SRO 40 (1)/2019 dated 11th January, 2019 
2 Substituted vide SRO 687(I)/2026 dated 24-04-2026 

 
23
(5) 
The Division concerned shall then-- 
 
 
 
(a) 
submit the case to the Cabinet-- 
 
 
 
(i) 
for approval of the draft Bill; 
 
 
 
(ii) 
for deciding any issue that may still be outstanding; 
 
(b) 
obtain the approval of the Prime Minister on the decisions of the 
Cabinet on the points mentioned in clause (a) where the approval has 
not already been given by the Prime Minister in the meeting of the 
Cabinet; and 
 
(c) 
obtain the signature of the Prime Minister on the consent or 
recommendation, or of the President on the previous sanction, where 
required to the introduction of the Bill in the Assembly or the Senate; 
and return the Bill to the Law and  Justice Division for further action in 
terms of sub-rule (8). 
 
 
 
1(5A) The Cabinet may, in an appropriate case, while according approval to the 
proposed legislation under sub-rule (1), dispense with the requirements of clause (a) of  
sub-rule (5) regarding submission of the case to the Cabinet for approval of the draft bill. 
 
 
 
(6) 
The Division concerned shall include in the brief prepared for use of the 
Minister-in-Charge the direction which the Cabinet has given regarding the line of action to 
be adopted with regard to the Bill. 
 
 
 
(7) 
Legislation relating to the codification of substantive law or for the 
consolidation of existing enactments or legislation of a purely formal character, e.g., 
repealing and amending Bills and short title Bills, may be initiated in the Law and  Justice 
Division. It shall, however, consult the Division concerned, if any, which shall consider the 
draft legislation from the administrative point of view and send their views to the Law and  
Justice Division. 
 
 
 
2(8) 
After taking action in terms of sub-rule (5) the Division concerned shall 
forward to the Law and Justice Division the draft legislation in its final form with a statement 
of objects and reasons duly signed by the Minister-in-Charge. The Law and  Justice Division, 
after satisfying itself that all legal requirements have been complied with for the introduction 
of the Bill in the Assembly or, as the case may be, the Senate, transfer the bill along with the 
statement of objects and reasons to the Parliamentary Affairs Division for arranging its 
introduction in the appropriate House. 
  
 
 
28. 
Non-Official Bills.--(1) 
The Division concerned shall be responsible for 
assessing the administrative implications of the proposed legislation and for consulting the 
other Divisions concerned, including the Finance Division, where necessary. 
 
 
 
(2) 
Thereafter the Division concerned shall consult the Law and  Justice Division 
who shall, apart from advising the Division concerned on the legal implications of the 
proposed legislation and the competence of the Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) to make a law 
on the subject to which the Bill relates, advise it as to whether any legal  
requirements are to be complied with and whether the Bill is one which cannot be introduced 
under the Constitution without the consent or recommendations of the Federal Government or 
previous sanction of the President. 
 
 
                                                          
1 Inserted vide SRO 135(I)/98, (F.No.4-6/97-Min-I) dated 3rd March 1998 
2 Inserted vide SRO 135(I)/98, (F.No.4-6/97-Min-I) dated 3rd March 1998 
  

 
24
 
1(3) 
Subject to sub-rule (3) of rule 5 and sub-rules (1) and (2) of this rule, the 
Minister-in-Charge shall decide regarding the provisions of the Bill as to which of the 
following motions in the Assembly or, as the case may be, in the Senate is to be supported: 
 
 
(a) 
that it be taken into consideration by the Assembly or, as the 
case may be, the Senate either at once or at some future date to 
be specified; 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) 
that it be referred to a Committee; 
 
 
(c) 
that it be circulated for the purpose of eliciting opinion thereon; 
and  
 
 
 
 
(d) 
that it be opposed. 
 
 
2(4) 
Subject to sub-rule (3), the Division shall obtain signature of the Prime 
Minister on the consent or recommendation, or of the President on the 
previous sanction, where required for introduction of the Bill in the Assembly 
or, as the case may be, the Senate. 
 
 
 
 
29. 
Official and non-official amendments to Bills.-- The procedure regarding 
official amendments shall be the same as for official bills and that for non-official 
amendments the same as for non-official Bills. 
 
 
30. 
Ordinances.--(1) 
The provisions of rule 27 shall apply mutatis mutandis 
when the proposed legislation is an Ordinance. The Law and Justice Division shall 
promulgate the Ordinance and in due course arrange to lay it before-- 
 
(i) 
the Assembly, if it contains provisions dealing with all or any of the 
matter specified in clause (2) of Article 73; 
 
 (ii) 
both Houses, if it does not contain provisions dealing with any of the 
matters referred to in clause(i). 
 
 
(2) 
When an ordinance is to be withdrawn the approval of the President shall be 
obtained by the Division concerned through the Prime Minister. 
 
 
PART F--RELATIONS WITH MAJLIS-E-SHOORA (PARLIAMENT) 
 
 
 
31. 
Compliance with Rules of Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament).-- All Divisions 
shall, in their relations with the Assembly, the Senate and Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) in 
joint sitting comply with the Rules of Procedure and Standing Orders of the Assembly, the 
Senate or the joint sitting, as the case may be. 
 
 
32. 
Summoning of Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament), a House or joint sitting by 
the President.--(1) 
At the appropriate time the Secretary Parliamentary Affairs Division 
shall ascertain the state of business pending for consideration of the Assembly, the Senate or 
Joint sitting. 
  
 
 
(2) 
The Secretary Parliamentary Affairs Division, shall in terms of rule 15-A, 
obtain the President's orders on summoning the Assembly, the Senate, both Houses or Majlis-
e-Shoora (Parliament) in joint sitting, as the case may be, and communicate the date, time and 
place of the commencement of the session-- 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
in the case of the Assembly, to the Secretary of the Assembly; 
 
 
 
(b) 
in the case of the Senate, to the Secretary of the Senate; 
 
                                                          
1 Substituted vide SRO 634(1)/2016 (F.No.4-2/2016-Min-I) dated 22nd July, 2016 
2 Substituted vide SRO 634(1)/2016 (F.No.4-2/2016-Min-I) dated 22nd July, 2016 

 
25
(c) 
in the case of both Houses and joint sitting, to the Secretary of the 
Assembly and also to the Secretary of the Senate; 
 
 
 
(3) 
Upon receipt of a communication under sub-rule (2), the date, time and place 
for the commencement of the session shall be notified in the Gazette- 
 
 
(a) 
in the case of the Assembly, by the Secretary of the Assembly; 
 
 
 
(b) 
in the case of the Senate, by the Secretary of the Senate; 
 
(c) 
in the case of both Houses or joint sitting, by the Secretary of the 
Assembly and also by the Secretary of the Senate. 
 
 
 
 
33. 
Prorogation of Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament), a House, or joint sitting by 
the President.--(1) At the appropriate time, the Secretary Parliamentary Affairs Division 
shall in terms of rule 15-A, obtain President's orders on prorogation of the Assembly, the 
Senate, both Houses or Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) in joint sitting, as the case may be and 
communicate the same,-- 
 
 
 
(a) 
in the case of the Assembly, to the Secretary of the Assembly; 
 
 
 
 
(b) 
in the case of the Senate, to the Secretary of the Senate; 
 
(c) 
in the case of both Houses and joint sitting, to the Secretary of the 
Assembly and also to the Secretary of the Senate. 
 
 
 
(2) 
Upon receipt of a communication under sub-rule (1), the date of prorogation 
of the session shall be notified in the Gazette,-- 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
in the case of the Assembly, by the Secretary of the Assembly; 
 
 
 
(b) 
in the case of the Senate, by the Secretary of the Senate; 
 
(c) 
in the case of both Houses and joint sitting, by the Secretary of the 
Assembly and also by the Secretary of the Senate. 
 
 
34. 
Summoning  and  prorogation  of  National  Assembly by the  
Speaker.--(1)   When the Assembly is summoned by the Speaker under clause (3) of article 
54, the date, time and place for the commencement of the session shall be notified in the 
Gazette by the Secretary of the Assembly. 
 
 
 
(2) 
When the Assembly is prorogued by the Speaker under clause (3) of Article 
54, the date of prorogation shall be notified in the Gazette by the Secretary of the Assembly. 
 
 
35. 
Summoning and prorogation of the Senate by the Chairman.--(1) When 
the Senate is summoned by the Chairman under clause (3) of article 54 read with Article 61, 
the date, time and place for the commencement of the session shall be notified in the Gazette 
by the Secretary of the Senate. 
 
 
 
(2) 
When the Senate is prorogued by the Chairman under clause (3) of Article 54 
read with Article 61, the date of prorogation shall be notified in the Gazette by the Secretary 
of the Senate. 
 
 
 
36. 
Review of official and non-official business.--   As soon as a notification 
under sub-rule (3) of rule 32, sub-rule (1) of rule 34, or sub-rule (1) of rule 35 is issued, all 
Divisions shall undertake a review of official and non-official business intended to be 
brought before the Assembly, the Senate, both Houses or the joint sitting, as the case may be, 
and shall promptly forward to the Parliamentary Affairs Division detailed lists of such 
business, not later than five days before the commencement of the session. 
 
 
37. 
Provisional 
forecast 
of 
official 
and 
non-official 
business.--                    
The Secretary Parliamentary Affairs Division shall prepare a provisional forecast of the 

 
26
business to be brought before the Assembly, the Senate or the joint sitting, as the case may  
be and shall make, through the appropriate Leader of the House, or in the case of the joint 
sitting, through the Prime Minister, proposals to the Speaker or , as the case may be, the 
Chairman for the allotment of days for the transaction of official as well as non-official 
business. The final arrangement as approved by the Speaker or, the Chairman as the case may 
be, shall be circulated by the appropriate Secretariat to all the Divisions and the Secretary, 
Prime Minister's Office. 
 
 
38. 
Orders of the Day.-- The Secretary Parliamentary Affairs Division, shall, in 
consultation with the appropriate Leader of the House, prepare orders of the day for each 
official day and forward it to the appropriate Secretariat. In the case of a joint sitting, the 
Orders of the Day shall be prepared in consultation with the Prime Minister and forwarded to 
the Secretary of the Assembly. 
 
 
 
 
39. 
Transmission of Bills etc.--(1)     Copies of Bills, including Bills passed by 
one House and transmitted to the other House, Bills to be reconsidered by the Assembly and 
Bills to be considered in a joint sitting, resolutions, notices, questions and other business to be 
brought before the Assembly, the Senate or the joint sitting shall be forwarded as soon as 
received or possible, by the appropriate Secretariat to the Division concerned. 
  
 
 
(2) 
If a Bill, resolution, motion or question has been wrongly addressed to a 
Division by the appropriate Secretariat, it shall be promptly transferred by the receiving 
Division to the Division concerned, under advice to that Secretariat. 
 
 
 
(3) 
The appropriate Secretariat shall inform the Division concerned as soon as it is 
known that a resolution, motion or question has been admitted in its final form or not 
admitted so that the Division concerned may regulate its action accordingly. 
 
 
 
(4) 
Before the commencement of each session of the National Assembly or the 
Senate, the appropriate Secretariat shall ascertain from the Cabinet Division the allocation of 
business amongst the Divisions. 
 
 
40. 
Action by Divisions.--  As soon as any communication (whether a notice, 
intimation, a Bill or any other paper) is received from the appropriate Secretariat or any other 
authority regarding the business or affairs of the Assembly, the Senate or the joint sitting, the 
receiving officer shall at once bring it to the notice of the Secretary and the Minister. 
 
 
41. 
Introduction of Bills, etc.--(1) A Money Bill shall originate in the National 
Assembly: 
 
  
 
Provided that simultaneously when a Money Bill including the Finance Bill 
containing the Annual Budget Statement is presented in the National Assembly, a copy 
thereof shall be transmitted to the Senate which may, within fourteen days, make 
recommendations thereon to the National Assembly. 
 
 
          (1A) 
The National Assembly shall consider the recommendations of the Senate and, 
after the Bill has been passed by the Assembly with or without incorporating the 
recommendations of the Senate, it shall be presented to the President for assent. 
 
 
(2) 
Bills, other than Money Bills, resolutions, motions, questions or other business 
with respect to any matter in the Federal Legislative List originate or be moved or asked, in 
or, as the case may be, brought before either House: 
 
 
 
Provided that the Prime Minister shall determine the House in which a 
particular official bill, resolution or motion originate or be moved or, as the case may be, 
before which any other official business shall be brought. 
 

 
27
 
 (3) 
Omitted vide S.R.O. No. 822(I)/2002, dated 20.11.2002. 
 
 
(4) 
An official Bill shall be introduced in the Assembly, or as the case may be, the 
Senate by the Minister-in-Charge or by any other Minister on his behalf. 
 
 
(5) 
The Minister concerned shall in consultation with the Leader of the House, 
decide as to which of the following motion should be made with regard to an official Bill 
after its introduction,-- 
 
 
 
(a) 
that it be taken into consideration at once and passed; or 
 
 
 
(b) 
that it be taken into consideration on a date to be specified; or 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(c) 
that it be referred to a Select Committee; or 
 
 
 
(d) 
that it be circulated for the purpose of eliciting opinion thereon; 
 
 
 
Provided that if a question of important policy is involved, the Minister shall obtain 
the orders of the Prime Minister. 
 
 
 
(6) 
Omitted vide SRO No. 822(I)/2002, dated 20.11.2002. 
 
 
 
(7) 
The Division concerned shall prepare for the use of the Minister-in-Charge a 
brief of each Bill, whether official or non-official. 
 
 
42. 
Assent to Bills.--   A Bill to be presented to the President for his assent shall 
be forwarded by the appropriate Secretariat duly certified by the Speaker or, as the case may 
be, the Chairman to the Parliamentary Affairs Division who shall submit it to the President 
for his assent. The President shall- 
 
 
 
(a) 
assent to the Bill, or 
 
(b) 
if it is a Bill other than a Money Bill, return the Bill to the Majlis-e-
Shoora (Parliament) with a message requesting that the Bill, or any 
specified provision thereof, be reconsidered and that any amendments 
specified in the message be considered. 
 
 
 
 
142A Reconsideration of Bill by Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament).− When the 
President has returned a Bill to the Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament), it shall be reconsidered by 
the Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) in joint sitting and if it is passed by the votes of the majority 
of the members of both Houses present and voting, it shall be deemed for the purposes of the 
Constitution to have been passed by both Houses and shall be presented to the President, and 
the President shall give his assent within ten days, failing which such assent shall be deemed 
to have been given. 
 
 
43. 
Resolutions.--(1) When an official resolution is to be moved in the Assembly, 
the Senate or the joint sitting, the Division concerned shall, where time permits, consult the 
Law and Justice Division and obtain approval of the Cabinet, before forwarding the 
resolution with a notice signed by the Minister to the Secretary of the appropriate Secretariat: 
 
 
Provided that no such resolution shall be forwarded to the appropriate Secretariat until 
the Prime Minister has seen it if he was not present at the Cabinet meeting, or where 
there was no time to consult the Cabinet. 
 
 
Note:- Official resolutions may be for the ratification of an international 
convention, constitution of a statutory body, declaration of policy on a matter 
of public interest, etc. 
  
 
 
(2) 
On receipt of a non-official resolution from the appropriate Secretariat, the 
Division concerned shall examine its contents and, when the resolution is admitted for 
discussion, obtain the orders of the Cabinet if time permits. But the orders of the Prime 
                                                          
1 Substituted vide S.R.O. 368 (I)/2010 dated 1st June 2010 

 
28
Minister shall in any case be obtained. In examining the resolution, the Division concerned 
shall consider whether the discussion of the resolution, or any part thereof, would be 
detrimental to the public interest and if so, it should point this out with reasons in its 
comments on the resolution. 
 
 
(3) 
The Division concerned shall prepare regarding each resolution, whether 
official or non-official, a brief for the use of the Minister. 
 
 
(4) 
After a resolution has been adopted, the appropriate Secretariat shall forward it 
to the Division concerned for appropriate action. 
 
44. 
Motions.--(1) The Division concerned shall submit an official motion, 
together with a notice, to the Minister-in-Charge and after he has signed it, shall forward it to 
the appropriate Secretariat. 
 
 
Note:- Official motions may be for the election of members to a 
Standing Committee or a statutory body, raising discussion on a 
particular matter, etc. 
 
(2) 
On receipt of a non-official motion from the appropriate Secretariat, the 
Division concerned shall consider whether a discussion of the motion, or any part thereof, 
would be detrimental to the public interest. 
 
 
 
(3) 
If the Division is of opinion that discussion of a motion or any part thereof 
would be detrimental to the public interest or that the motion or any part thereof involves a 
point of important policy which requires the orders of the Prime Minister or the Cabinet 
under these rules, it shall, as soon as the motion is admitted, submit the case for the orders of 
the Prime Minister or, as the case may be, the Cabinet and shall in doing so state the reasons 
for holding such opinion. 
 
 
 
(4) 
The Division concerned shall prepare regarding each motion, whether official 
or non-official, a brief for the use of the Minister. 
 
 
(5) 
After a motion has been adopted, the appropriate Secretariat shall forward it to 
the Division concerned for appropriate action. 
 
 
45. 
Questions.--(1) On receipt, from the appropriate Secretariat, of a question 
(starred, un-starred or short notice) proposed to be asked by a member, the Division 
concerned shall draft a reply and after it has been approved by the Minster forward the 
required number of copies of the reply to the appropriate Secretariat before the day on which 
the question is put down for answer. In the case of a starred question, a brief be prepared by 
the Division concerned for the use of the Minister in answering any supplementary question 
that may be asked. 
 
 
(2) 
A copy of each supplementary question asked in respect of a starred question, 
and of the reply given thereto, shall be forwarded by the appropriate Secretariat to the 
Division concerned, as soon as possible after the proceedings have been transcribed. 
 
 
(3) 
The Division concerned shall be responsible for the fulfilment of any 
undertakings given on its behalf in reply to a question or a supplementary question. 
 
 
46. 
Budget.--(1) The Minister for Finance shall, in consultation with the Prime 
Minister and the Speaker, prepare a time-table for the consideration of annual budget by the 
Assembly. The Secretary of the Assembly shall intimate the time-table so decided upon to all 
the Divisions and the Secretary, Prime Minister's Office. 
  
 
 
(2) 
On receipt of a motion proposing a cut in a demand (or supplementary 
demand) for grant of funds, the Division concerned shall examine the points raised by the 
member, and any further points likely to be raised, and prepare a brief for the use of the 
Minister-in-Charge in making a reply. 
 
 

 
29
 
(3) 
When the budget is passed by the Assembly, the Minister for Finance shall 
submit the Schedule of Authorized Expenditure to the Prime Minister who shall authenticate 
the Schedule by his signature as required by Article 83. 
 
 
47. 
Committees of Assembly or Senate.--Standing or ad-hoc Committees may be 
constituted by the Assembly or the Senate to advise the Divisions concerned on general 
administrative policy or a special problem. 
PART G -- RELATIONS WITH PROVINCES 
 
 
 
48. 
Directions to the Governors.-- No Division shall issue a directive to the 
Governor of the Province under clause (1) of Article 145 without the specific approval of the 
Prime Minister. 
 
 
 
49.  
Obligations of Provinces and Federation  
 
(1) 
Omitted vide S.R.O 368(I)/2010 (F.No.4-6/2010-Min-I) dated 1st June 2010.  
 
 
 
(2)  
Omitted vide S.R.O 368(I)/2010 (F.No.4-6/2010-Min-I) dated 1st June 2010.  
 
 
(3) 
The implementation of an international agreement in the Provincial field shall 
normally be the responsibility of the Provincial Government unless in any case specific 
orders of the Prime Minister are obtained by the Division concerned in accordance with rule 
15(1)(c). 
 
 
 
(4) 
The Foreign Affairs Division shall issue necessary instructions to the 
Provincial Governments in the matter of conducting correspondence with the Government of 
a foreign country or a Pakistan Diplomatic Mission abroad or a Foreign Mission in Pakistan 
or an International Organisation. 
 
 
50. 
Conferment of powers and imposition of duties upon a Province. -- The 
Division concerned shall obtain the specific orders of the Prime Minister, if it is proposed to 
enact a law conferring powers and imposing duties upon a Province or officers or authorities 
thereof under clause (2) of Article 146. 
 
 
150A. Secretariat of Council of Common Interests. — (1) There shall be a 
Secretariat of the Council of Common Interests (SCCI), having status of a Division which 
shall be headed by the Secretary to the Council of Common Interests. 
 
 
(2) 
The Secretary of the Council shall report directly to the Prime Minister, in the 
latter’s capacity as Chairman, CCI and shall also function as principal accounting officer of 
the Secretariat. 
 
 
(3) 
The procedure for conduct of business of the Council of Common Interests 
shall be governed in terms of the Rules of Procedure of the Council of Common Interests, 
2010.  
 
PART H -- EMERGENCY PROVISIONS 
 
 
 
51. 
Proclamation of Emergency on account of war, internal disturbance,  
etc.--(1) The Proclamation in case of a grave emergency in which the security of Pakistan, or 
any part thereof is threatened by war or external aggression, or by internal disturbance 
beyond the power of a Provincial Government to control, shall be issued by the Cabinet 
Division in terms of rule 15-A. 
 
 
(2) 
The Divisions concerned shall keep the provisions of clauses (2) to (8) of 
Article 232 in view for making legislation, if required, while a Proclamation of Emergency is 
in force and for submission of the Proclamation to the joint sitting or the Senate, as the case 
                                                          
1 Inserted vide SRO No. 1373(1)/2021 dated 01-12-2021 

 
30
may be. 
 
 
(3) 
The provisions of rules 27, 28, 29 and 30 shall apply mutatis mutandis for the 
purpose of legislation while a Proclamation of emergency is in force. 
 
  
 
 
52. 
Failure of constitutional machinery in a Province.--(1)The Proclamation in 
case of failure of constitutional machinery in a Province shall be issued by the Cabinet 
Division in terms of rule 15-A. 
 
 
 
(2) 
The Division concerned shall keep the provisions of clauses (3) to (6) of 
Article 234 in view for making legislation, if required, while a Proclamation of Emergency is 
in force and for submission of the Proclamation to the joint sitting or the Senate, as the case 
may be. 
  
 
 
(3) 
The provisions of rules 27, 28, 29 and 30 shall apply mutatis mutandis for the 
purpose of legislation while a Proclamation of Emergency is in force. 
 
 
53. 
Proclamation in case of financial stringency.--(1) The Proclamation in case 
of financial stringency shall be issued by the Finance Division in terms of rule 15-A. 
 
 
 
(2) 
The Finance Division shall keep the provisions of clause (4) of Article 235 in 
view for submission of the Proclamation to the joint sitting or the Senate, as the case may be. 
 
 
54. 
Revocation of Proclamation, etc.-- The Proclamation issued under rule 51,52 
or 53 shall be varied or revoked by a subsequent Proclamation to be issued by the Division 
concerned in terms of rule 15-A. 
 
PART I -- MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
 
 
55. 
Protection and communication of official information.--1(1) Information 
acquired from official documents relating to official matters shall only be communicated by a 
government servant or, as the case may be, designated official to the press, to  
non-officials, or even to officials belonging to other government offices in accordance with 
the procedure laid down in section 3 of the Freedom of Information Ordinance, 2002  
(XCVI of 2002). 
 
 
 
(2) 
Detailed instructions shall be issued by the Cabinet Division for the treatment 
and custody of official documents and information of a classified nature. 
 
 
 
(3) 
Ordinarily all official news and information shall be conveyed to the press and 
the public through the Press Information Department or the External Publicity Wing of the 
Information and Broadcasting Division. The manner in which this may be done shall be 
prescribed by general or special orders to be issued by the Information and Broadcasting 
Division. 
 
 
 
(4) 
Only Ministers and Secretaries, and such officers as may be authorized, shall 
act as official spokesmen of the Government. No statement involving foreign policy shall 
normally be made by a person (other than the Minster of State for Foreign Affairs and the 
Prime Minister) without prior consultation with the Foreign Affairs Division. 
 
 
 
56. 
Channels of Communications.--(1) Except as provided in sub-rule (2), all 
correspondence with the Government of a foreign country or a Pakistan diplomatic mission 
abroad or a foreign mission in Pakistan or an international organization shall normally be 
conducted through the Foreign Affairs Division: 
 
 
 
Provided that by means of general or special orders to be issued by the Foreign 
Affairs Division, direct correspondence may be allowed under such conditions and 
circumstances as may be specified. 
 
                                                          
1 Substituted vide SRO 709(I)/2003 (F.No. 4-8/2003-Min), dated 15.7.2003 
 

 
31
 
(2) 
All requests to a foreign Government or an international organization for 
economic or technical assistance shall be made through the Economic Affairs Division, 
which shall correspond with the foreign Government, etc., in accordance with the prescribed 
channel. The Economic Affairs Division may allow, by general or special orders, such 
requests to be made direct. 
 
 
(3) 
Correspondence with Provincial Governments shall be conducted directly by 
the Division, in respect of the subjects allocated to them, subject to the provisions of rule 8, 
and it shall ordinarily be addressed to the Secretary of the Department concerned in the 
Provincial Government: 
 
 
 
 
Provided that under general or special orders to be issued by a Division, its Attached 
Department may be authorized to correspond directly with the Department of a Provincial 
Government under such conditions and circumstances as may be specified therein. 
 
 
 (4) 
Copies of the correspondence with the Provincial Government in respect of 
the affairs of former and acceding states, if any,[***]1 shall be endorsed to the States and 
Frontier Regions Division, provided that Division may, by means of general or special orders, 
specify the class or classes of correspondence which shall be conducted through that 
Division. 
 
 
 
 
(5) 
All correspondence with the headquarters of the Defence Forces viz. General 
Headquarters, Naval Headquarters, Air Headquarters, or their subordinate formations, shall 
normally be conducted through the Defence Division: 
 
 
Provided that by means of general or special orders to be issued by the Defence 
Division direct correspondence may be allowed under such conditions and circumstances as 
may be specified: 
 
 
Provided further that the provisions of this sub-rule shall not affect normal 
communications between a Service Commander and the Civil Authorities in his area of inter-
department discussion in which Service representatives are required to take part. 
 
 
257. 
Relaxation.--.- The Prime Minister may permit, where he considers it 
necessary, relaxation of the provisions of these rules in individual cases. 
 
 
58. 
Repeal.-- The Rules of Business, 1962 are hereby repealed: 
 
       Provided that all rules, instructions and orders issued under the provisions of these Rules 
shall continue in force so far as applicable and with the necessary adaptations until altered, 
repealed or amended by the appropriate authority. 
 
 
                                                          
1 Omitted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 
2 Substituted vide S.R.O. 368 (I)/2010 (F.No.4-6/2010-Min-I) dated 1st June 2010 

 
32
SCHEDULE I 
[See rule 3(1)] 
LIST OF MINISTRIES AND DIVISIONS 
Sr. 
No. 
Ministries 
Divisions 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
1. 
1Cabinet Secretariat 
(a) 
Cabinet Division 
(b) 
Establishment Division 
(c) 
Intelligence Bureau Division 
(d) 
National Security Division 
(e) 
2Special Investment Facilitation Council 
(SIFC) Division 
1A 
Omitted vide SRO 83(I)/2025 dated 
4th February, 2025 
 
Omitted vide SRO 83(I)/2025 dated 4th 
February, 2025 
2. 
3Ministry of Climate Change and 
Environmental Coordination 
 
Climate Change and Environmental 
Coordination Division 
3. 
4Ministry of Commerce   
 
Commerce Division 
4. 
Ministry of Communications 
 
Communications Division 
5. 
Ministry of Defence 
 
Defence Division 
6. 
Ministry of Defence Production 
 
Defence Production Division 
56A. 
Ministry of Economic Affairs 
 
Economic Affairs Division 
7. 
Ministry of Energy 
(a) 
Power Division 
(b) 
Petroleum Division 
8. 
6Ministry 
of 
Federal 
Education, 
Professional 
 Training, 
National 
Heritage and Culture  
(a) 
 
Federal Education and Professional  
Training Division 
 
(b) 
7National Heritage and Culture Division 
 
 
9. 
8Ministry of Finance and Revenue  
(a) 
Finance Division 
(b) 
Revenue Division 
10. 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
 
Foreign Affairs Division 
11. 
Ministry of Housing and Works 
 
Housing and Works Division 
12. 
Ministry of Human Rights 
 
Human Rights Division 
                                                          
1 Substituted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 
2 Inserted vide SRO 1986 (I)/2024 dated 05-12-2024 
3 Substituted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 
4 Substituted vide SRO 1025 (1)/2020 dated 8th October, 2020 
5 Inserted vide SRO 1025 (1)/2020 dated 8th October, 2020 
6 Substituted vide SRO 1025 (1)/2020 dated 8th October, 2020 
7 Substituted vide SRO 1025 (1)/2020 dated 8th October, 2020 
8 Substituted vide SRO 1025 (1)/2020 dated 8th October, 2020 

 
33
13. 
Ministry of Industries and Production 
 
Industries and Production Division 
14. 
Ministry 
of 
Information 
and  
Broadcasting 
 
Information and Broadcasting Division 
15. 
Ministry of Information Technology 
and Telecommunication 
 
Information 
Technology 
and 
Telecommunication Division 
16. 
1Ministry of Interior and Narcotics 
Control  
 
Interior and Narcotics Control Division 
17. 
Ministry 
of 
Inter-Provincial 
Coordination 
 
Inter- Provincial Coordination Division 
18. 
2Ministry of Kashmir Affairs, Gilgit-
Baltistan and States and Frontier 
Regions 
 
Kashmir Affairs, Gilgit-Baltistan and 
States and Frontier Regions Division 
19. 
Ministry of Law and  Justice  
 
Law and Justice Division 
19A. 
Ministry of Maritime Affairs 
 
Maritime Affairs Division 
20. 
Omitted vide SRO 83(I)/2025 dated 
4th February, 2025 
 
Omitted vide SRO 83(I)/2025 dated 4th 
February, 2025 
21. 
Ministry of National Food Security 
and Research  
 
National Food Security and Research 
Division 
22. 
Ministry of National Health Services, 
Regulations and Coordination 
 
National Health Services, Regulations 
and Coordination Division 
23. 
Ministry of Overseas Pakistanis and 
Human Resource Development 
 
Overseas 
Pakistanis 
and 
Human 
Resource Development Division 
24. 
Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs 
 
Parliamentary Affairs Division 
25. 
3Ministry of Planning, Development 
and Special Initiatives 
 
Planning, Development and Special 
Initiatives Division 
25A. 
4Ministry of Poverty Alleviation and 
Social Safety  
 
Poverty Alleviation and Social Safety 
Division 
26. 
Omitted vide SRO 1262 (1)/2017 
dated 20-12-2017 
 
Omitted vide SRO 1262 (1)/2017 dated 
20-12-2017 
27. 
Omitted vide SRO 1025 (1)/2020 
dated 8th October, 2020 
 
Omitted vide SRO 1025 (1)/2020 dated 
8th October, 2020 
28. 
Ministry of Privatization  
 
Privatization Division 
29. 
Ministry of Railways 
 
Railways Division 
30. 
Ministry of Religious Affairs and 
Inter faith Harmony 
 
Religious 
Affairs 
and 
Inter 
faith 
Harmony Division 
31. 
Ministry of Science and Technology 
 
Science and Technology Division 
32. 
Omitted vide SRO 83(I)/2025 dated 
4th February, 2025 
 
Omitted vide SRO 83(I)/2025 dated 4th 
February, 2025 
33. 
Omitted vide SRO 487 (1) /2019 
dated 23rd April, 2019 
 
Omitted 
vide 
SRO 
487(1) 
/2019  
dated 23rd April, 2019 
34. 
Ministry of Water Resources  
 
Water Resources Division 
 
                                                          
1 Substituted vide SRO 83(I)/2025 dated 4th February, 2025 
2 Substituted vide SRO 83(I)/2025 dated 4th February, 2025 
3 Substituted vide SRO 1025 (1)/2020 dated 8th October, 2020 
4 Inserted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 

 
34
SCHEDULE II 
[Rule 3 (3)] 
DISTRIBUTION OF BUSINESS AMONG THE DIVISIONS 
 
 
1. 
Omitted vide SRO 83(I)/2025 dated 4th February, 2025 
   
2. 
Cabinet Division 
 
 
1. 
All secretarial work for the Cabinet, National Economic Council and their 
Committees, Secretaries' Committee. 
 
2. 
Follow up and implementation of decisions of all the bodies mentioned at (1) 
above. 
 
 
3. 
Omitted vide S.R.O 226(I)/2010 (F.No.4-4/2007-Min-I), dated 2nd April,     
                       2010. 
 
4. 
National Economic Council: Its constitution and appointment of members. 
 
 
5. 
Secretaries Committee. 
 
 
6. 
Central Pool of Cars. 
 
7. 
All matters relating to President, Prime Minister, Federal Ministers, Ministers 
of State, Persons of Minister's status without Cabinet rank, Special Assistants 
to the Prime Minister. 
 
8. 
Appointments, resignations, salaries, allowances and privileges of Provincial 
Governors. 
 
9. 
Strength, terms and conditions of service of the personal staff of the Ministers, 
Ministers of State, Special Assistants to the Prime Minister, dignitaries who 
enjoy the rank and status of a Minister or Minister of State. 
 
10. 
Rules of Business: Setting up of a Division, allocation of business to a 
Division and constitution of a Division or group of Divisions as a Ministry. 
 
 
11. 
Implementation of the directives of the President/Prime Minister. 
 
 
12. 
Preparation of Annual Report in relation to Federation on observance of 
Principles of Policy. 
 
13. 
Budget for the Cabinet: Budget for the Supreme Judicial Council. 
 
14. 
Omitted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 
 
15. 
Coordination of defence effort at the national level by forging effective liaison 
between the Armed Forces, Federal Ministries and the Provincial 
Governments at the national level; Secretariat functions of the various Post-
War Problems. 
 
16. 
Communications Security. 
 
17. 
Omitted vide SRO 445 (I) /2012, dated 30.4.2012. 
 
18. 
Instructions for delegations abroad and categorization of International 
conferences. 
 
19. 
Security and proper custody of official documents and Security Instructions 
for protection of classified matter in Civil Departments. 
 
 
20. 
Preservation of State Documents. 
 
21. 
Coordination: Control of fixed line office and residence telephones, mobile 

 
35
phones, faxes, internet/DSL connections, ISD, toll-free numbers, green 
telephones etc., staff cars; Rules for the use of staff cars; common services 
such as teleprinter service, mail delivery service, etc. 
 
22. 
Civil Awards: Gallantry Awards. 
 
23. 
Tosha Khana. 
 
24. 
Omitted vide SRO 834(i) / 2015 dated 24-8-2015. 
 
25. 
Repatriation of civilians and civil internees from India, Bangla Desh and those 
stranded in Nepal and other foreign countries, and all other concerned matters. 
 
26. 
Resettlement and rehabilitation of civilians and civil Government servants 
uprooted from East Pakistan including policy for grant of relief and 
compensation for losses suffered by them. 
 
27. 
All matters arising out of options exercised by and expatriation of Bengalies 
from Pakistan. 
 
28. 
Grant of subsistence allowance to Government servants under the rule making 
control of the Government of East Pakistan and its corporations, and their 
families stranded in West Pakistan. 
 
29. 
Management of movable and immovable properties left by the Bengalis in 
Pakistan. 
 
30. 
Administration of the "Special Fund" for POWs and civilian internees held in 
India and War displaced persons. 
 
31. 
Defence of Pakistan Ordinance and Rules. 
 
32. 
Omitted vide SRO1088 (I)/2011, dated 09.12.2011. 
 
33. 
Stationery and Printing for Federal Government official Publications, Printing 
Corporation of Pakistan. 
 
34. 
Omitted vide SRO1088 (I)/2011, dated 09.12.2011. 
 
35. 
Omitted vide SRO No.246 (1)/2001, dated 26.4.2001.  
 
36. 
Omitted vide Cabinet Division Notification No.4-5/99-Min.I, dated                    
3rd June, 1999. 
 
37. 
Omitted vide SRO 577(I)/2002, dated 31.8.2002. 
 
38-41. Omitted vide SRO 226(I)/2010, dated 02.04.2010. 
 
 
 
42-51. Omitted vide SRO 538 (I)/2001, dated 26.7.2001. 
 
52. 
National Archives including Muslim Freedom Archives. 
 
53.       Omitted vide SRO 464 (1) / 2017 dated 12-06-2017.  
 
54.       Omitted vide SRO788 (I)/2011, dated 23.08.2011. 
 
55.  
People Works Programme (Rural Development Programme). 
 
56.  
Pride of Performance Award in the field of arts. 
 
57-60. Omitted vide SRO1088 (I)/2011, dated 09.12.2011 
 
61.  
Pride of Performance Award in academic fields. 
 
62.  
Omitted vide SRO 428 (1)/2018 dated 04-04-2018. 
 

 
36
63.  
Omitted vide SRO 428 (1)/2018 dated 04-04-2018. 
 
64.  
Omitted vide SRO 48 (1)/2016 dated 26.1.2016. 
 
65. 
Omitted vide SRO 389 (I)/2013 dated 15.05.2013. 
 
66. 
Omitted vide SRO 445 (I)/2012 dated 30.04.2012. 
 
67.  
Omitted vide SRO 389 (I)/2013 dated 15.05.2013. 
 
68.  
Omitted vide SRO 428 (1)/2018 dated 04-04-2018. 
 
69.  
Omitted vide SRO 389 (I)/2013 dated 15.05.2013. 
 
70. 
Omitted vide SRO 389 (I)/2013 dated 15.05.2013. 
 
71.  
Omitted vide SRO 973(1)/2017 dated 25-09-2017. 
 
72.  
Omitted vide SRO 1373(1)/2021 dated 01-12-2021. 
 
73.  
Omitted vide SRO 487 (1)/2019 dated 23-04-2019. 
 
74.  
Omitted vide SRO 48 (1)/2016 dated 26.1.2016. 
 
75. 
Omitted vide SRO 487 (1)/2019 dated 23-04-2019. 
 
76. 
Omitted vide SRO 687(I)/2026 dated 24-04-2026. 
 
77. 
Treaty Implementation Cell. 
 
78.      Islamabad Club. 
 
79. 
Omitted vide SRO 1373(1)/2021 dated 01-12-2021. 
 
80. 
Omitted vide SRO 1025 (1)/2020 dated 8th October, 2020. 
 
 
81. 
Pakistan Commissions of Inquiry Act, 2017. 
 
82. 
Naya Pakistan Housing and Development Authority. 
 
 
 
83. 
Administrative control of the National Electric Power Regulatory Authority 
(NEPRA), Pakistan Telecommunication Authority (PTA), Frequency 
Allocation Board (FAB), Oil and Gas Regulatory Authority (OGRA) 
and 
Public Procurement Regulatory Authority (PPRA). 
 
 
84. 
Prime Minister’s Performance Delivery Unit (PMDU) including Pakistan  
 
 
Citizen Portal (PCP), operation and management of which shall be managed 
 
 
by Prime Minister’s Office (Public). 
 
85. 
(i) 
Warrant of precedence; 
 
(ii) 
Pakistan Flag; 
 
(iii) 
Coat of Arms, National Emblem, monograms, seals; 
 
(iv) 
Standard time for Pakistan; 
 
(v) 
Public holidays; and 
     
(vi) 
Gazette of Pakistan. 
 
 
1 86. 
Institutional Reforms Cell. 
 287. 
Special Technology Zones Authority. 
                                                          
1 Inserted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 [From 1st July, 2022 till 4th June, 2023 Institutional  
Reforms Cell remained under the Establishment Division (F.No.471(S)/2022-Cab;F.No. 4-1/2023-Min-I)]. 
2 Inserted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 

 
37
 188. 
Sheikh Sultan Trust. 
2 89. 
Pakistan Cricket Board. 
  90. 
Omitted vide SRO 964(I)/2025 dated 2nd June, 2025 
 391. 
Cannabis Control and Regulatory Authority. 
 492. 
5Administrative functions in respect of the following laws, namely: - 
(i) 
National Anti-Money Laundering and Counter Financing of Terrorism 
Authority Act, 2023 (LIII of 2023); and 
(ii) 
Inter-Governmental Commercial Transactions Act, 2022 (XXX of 
2022). 
  693. National Anti-Money Laundering and Counter Financing of Terrorism 
Authority of Pakistan. 
 794. 
National Engineering Services Pakistan (NESPAK). 
  895. Pakistan Virtual Assets Regulatory Authority.  
 
 
 
3. 
Omitted vide SRO 1171(1)/2018 dated 01-10-2018 
 
 
  
4. 
Climate Change and Environmental Coordination Division 
 
1. 
Omitted vide SRO 793 (1)/2018 (F.No.4-1/2018-Min-I) dated 25-06-2018. 
 
2. 
Pakistan Environmental Protection Council. 
 
3. 
Pakistan Environmental Protection Agency. 
 
4. 
Global Environmental Impact Study Centre, Islamabad. 
 
5. 
National policy, plans strategies and programmes with regard to disaster 
management including environmental protection, preservation, pollution, 
ecology, forestry, wildlife, biodiversity, climate change and desertification. 
 
6. 
Coordination, monitoring and implementation of environmental agreements 
with other countries, international agencies and forums. 
 
7.    Policy formulation, coordination and reporting of human settlements      including 
urban water supply, sewerage and drainage. 
 
8.      Islamabad Wildlife Management Board. 
 
5. 
Commerce Division 
 
1. 
Imports and export across custom frontiers including,- 
(i) treaties, agreements, protocols and conventions with other countries and 
international agencies bearing on trade and commerce; 
 
(ii) promotion of foreign trade including trade offices abroad, trade 
delegations to and from abroad, overseas trade exhibitions and conferences 
                                                          
1 Inserted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 
2 Inserted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 
3 Inserted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 
4 Inserted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 
5 Substituted vide SRO 687(I)/2026 dated 24-04-2026 
6 Inserted vide SRO  1986 (I)/2024 dated 05-12-2024 
7 Inserted vide SRO  1986 (I)/2024 dated 05-12-2024 
8 Added vide SRO 687(I)/2026 dated 24-04-2026 

 
38
and committees connected with foreign trade; 
 
Note: Textile Industry Division will be consulted on textile trade 
negotiations and also associated with Textile Sector Trade Promotion. 
 
(iii) standards of quality of goods to be imported and exported. 
 
(iv) transit trade and border trade; and 
 
(v) state trading. 
 
2. 
Inter-Provincial trade. 
 
 
3. 
Commercial intelligence and statistics. 
 
4. 
Omitted vide SRO 226(I)/2010, dated 02.04.2010. 
5. 
Organization and Control of chambers and associations of commerce and 
industry. 
6. 
Tariff (protection) policy and its implementation. 
7. 
Law of insurance; regulation and control of insurance companies; actual work; 
insurance of war, riot and civil commotion risks and life insurance but 
excluding health and unemployment insurance for industrial labour and post 
office insurance. 
8. 
Omitted vide SRO1088 (I)/2011, dated 09.12.2011. 
9. 
Export promotion. 
 
10. 
Special Selection Board for selection of Commercial Officers for posting in 
Pakistan Missions abroad. 
 
11. 
Anti-dumping duties, countervailing and safeguard laws. 
 
12. 
Management of EDF/EMDF with representation of Textile Industry Division 
on their Boards. 
 
13. 
Domestic commerce reforms and development in collaboration with other 
Ministries, provincial and local governments. 
 
14. 
Intellectual Property Organization of Pakistan (IPO-Pakistan). 
 
15. 
e-Commerce Policy and its Implementation. 
 
 
 
16. 
Textile Industrial Policy. 
 
 
17. 
Coordination and liaison with Federal Agencies/Institutions, Provincial  
 
 
Governments and Local Government entities for facilitation and promotion 
 
 
of the textile sector. 
 
 
 
18. 
Liaison, dialogues, negotiations, except trade negotiations, and cooperation 
 
with international donor agencies and multilateral regulatory and  
 
development organizations with regard to textile sector. 
 
 
19. 
Setting of standards; and monitoring and maintaining vigilance for strict  
 
 
compliance of the standards throughout production and value chain. 
 

 
39
 
20. 
Textile related statistics, surveys, commercial intelligence, analysis and  
 
 
dissemination of information and reports on international demand patterns, 
 
 
market access etc. 
 
 
21. 
Linkages with cotton and textile producing countries. 
 
 
22. 
Training, skill development, research for quality improvement and   
 
 
productivity enhancement throughout the production/value chain. 
 
 
23. 
Management of Textile Quotas. 
 
 
 
24. 
Administrative control of- 
 
(i) 
Federal Textile Board. 
(ii) 
Textile Commissioner’s Organization. 
(iii) 
Textile City (Projects), Karachi/Faisalabad. 
(iv) 
National Textile University, Faisalabad. 
(v) 
Directorate General of Textiles & Quota Supervisory Council. 
(vi) 
All textiles related EPB/EDF funded institutes concerned with skill 
development in various sub-sectors of textile industry. 
 
(vii) Textile Testing Laboratory, Faisalabad. 
(viii) Garment City Projects at Lahore, Faisalabad and Karachi. 
(ix) 
Omitted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-24 
 
25. 
Cotton Hedge Markets. 
126. 
Export Development Fund. 
 
227. 
Administrative functions in respect of the Trade Dispute Resolution 
Act, 2022 (LVI of 2023). 
 
6.  
Communications Division  
 
 
1. 
 
National policy, planning, research and international aspects of roads and 
 
road transport; logistic; freight and coordination of multi model 
 
transportation. 
 
2. 
 
Motorway, National highways and strategic roads; National Highway Council 
and Authority; Administration of the Central Road Fund and Fund for Roads 
of National Importance. 
 
3. 
 
Enemy property. 
 
4. 
 
National highways and Motorways police. 
 
5. 
 
National Roads Safety Council, National Road Safety Steering Committee and 
National Road Safety Secretariat. 
 
6. 
 
Postal Services and Postal Life Insurance Company Limited. 
 
7. 
 
(i) 
services provided on behalf of the Federal Government and 
 
Provincial Government;  
(ii)   
agency functions on behalf of agency alliances and partnerships with 
corporate entities under regulatory regime of the Government such as 
the State Bank of Pakistan and the Securities and Exchange 
Commission of Pakistan, etc. 
 
8. 
Establish, regulate specialized entities in logistic and freight. 
                                                          
1 Inserted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 
2 Inserted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 

 
40
 
 
 
7. 
Defence Division 
 
1. 
Defence of the Federation or any part thereof in peace or war including:-- 
(i) 
Army, naval and air forces of the Federation and any other armed 
forces raised or maintained by the Federation; and armed forces which 
are not the forces of the Federation but are attached to or operating 
with any of the armed forces of the Federation; 
 
 
(ii) 
army, naval and air force works. 
 
 
2. 
Civilian employees paid from the Defence estimates. 
 
3. 
(i) 
Defence matters pertaining to treaties and agreements with other 
Governments except those relating to purchase of stores; and 
 
(ii) 
Matters regarding military assistance to foreign countries. 
 
 
4. 
Stores and stationery for the Defence Services, other than those dealt with by 
the  
Defence Production Division. 
 
 
5. 
(i) 
Administrative control of Northern Light Infantry; and 
 
 
 
(ii) 
Administration of National Guards Act, 1973. 
 
 
6. 
International Red Cross and Geneva Conventions in so far as they effect 
belligerents. 
 
 
 
 
7. 
Military awards and decorations. 
 
 
8. 
Welfare of ex-servicemen. 
 
 
9. 
Cantonment areas including-- 
 
 
(i) 
the delimitation of such areas; 
 
(ii) 
Local Self-Government in such areas, the constitution of local 
authorities for such areas and the functions and powers of such 
authorities; and 
 
(iii) 
the regulation of housing accommodation (including control of rent) in 
such areas. 
 
10. 
Acquisition or requisitioning of property for Defence Services; imposition of 
restrictions upon the use of lands in the vicinity of such property and of works 
of Defence. 
 
11. 
Pardons, reprieves and respites, etc., of all personnel belonging to the Armed 
Forces. 
 
 
12. 
Survey of Pakistan. 
 
13. 
Administrative and budgetary control of Federal Government Educational 
Institutions (Cantonments/Garrisons) Directorate and its Institutions. 
 
 
14. 
Administration of Military Lands and Cantonments Group. 
 
15 to 22. Omitted vide S.R.O.  622 (I)/2013, dated 28.06.2013. 
                                                                                      
 
23. 
National Maritime policy. 
 
24. 
(i) 
Matters relating to security of resources of the Maritime Zones of 
Pakistan including protection of human life and property. 
 
 
(ii) 
Pakistan Maritime Security Agency. 
 
 
25. 
(i) 
National coordination of maritime activities. 
 
 
(ii) 
National Maritime Affairs Coordination Committee. 

 
41
 
 
26. 
Marine surveys and elimination of dangers to navigation. 
 
 
27. 
Promotion of maritime disciplines. 
 
 
28. 
International aspects: 
 
(i) 
Matters arising out of the implementation of law of the Sea pertaining 
to Maritime Affairs. 
(ii) 
International negotiations, agreements and treaties (excluding those 
handled by other Divisions). 
(iii) 
Liaison with International Sea Bed Authorities and other International 
Agencies in the Maritime field. 
29. 
Omitted vide SRO 850(I)/2014 dated 25.09.2014. 
 
130. 
Fauji Foundation. 
 
231.  
Administrative functions in respect of the following laws, namely:- 
           
(a)  the National University of Pakistan Act, 2023 (XV of 2023); 
(b)  the Pakistan Airports Authority Act, 2023 (XLV of 2023); 
(c)  the Pakistan Civil Aviation Act, 2023 (XLIX of 2023); 
(d)  the Pakistan Air Safety Investigation Act, 2023 (L of 2023); and 
(e)  the National Logistics Corporation Act, 2023 (LII of 2023). 
 
32. 
Aircraft and air navigation. 
 
33. 
Development of civil aviation in Pakistan. 
 
34. 
Provision of aerodromes. 
 
35. 
Airports Development Agency. 
 
36. 
Regulation, organization and safety of air traffic and of aerodromes and 
administration of Airports Security Force. 
 
37. 
Pakistan International Airlines Corporation. 
 
38. 
Air Service agreements with other countries; liaison with International Civil 
Aviation Organization and other international agencies concerned with 
aviation. 
 
39. 
Federal Meteorological Organizations and Meteorological observatories; 
World  Meteorological Organizations. 
 
8. 
Defence Production Division 
 
 
1. 
Laying down policies or guidelines on all matters relating to defence 
production. 
 
2. 
Procurement of arms, firearms, weapons, ammunition, equipment, stores and 
explosives for the defence forces. 
 
3. 
Declaration of industries necessary for the purpose of defence or for the 
prosecution of war. 
 
4. 
Research and development of defence equipment and stores. 
 
                                                          
1 Inserted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 
2 Substituted vide SRO 83(I)/2025 dated 4th February, 2025 

 
42
5. 
Co-ordination of defence science research with civil scientific research 
organizations. 
 
6. 
Indigenous production and manufacture of defence equipment and stores. 
 
7. 
Negotiations of agreements or MOUs for foreign assistance or collaboration 
and loans for purchase of military stores and technical know-how or transfer 
of technology. 
 
8. 
Export of defence products. 
 
9. 
Marketing and promotion of activities relating to export of defence products. 
 
10. 
Co-ordinate production activities of all defence production organizations or 
establishments. 
 
9. 
Economic Affairs Division 
 
1. 
Assessment of requirements; programming and negotiations for external 
economic assistance from foreign Governments and organizations. 
 
2. 
Matters relating to IBRD, IDA, IFC, ADB and IFAD.                        
 
3. 
Economic matters pertaining to the Economic and Social Council of the 
United Nations, Governing Council of UNDP, ESCAP (Economic and Social 
Commission for Asia and Pacific), Colombo Plan and OECD (DAC). 
 
4. 
Negotiations and coordination activities, etc., pertaining to economic 
cooperation with other countries (excluding RCD and IPECC). 
 
5. 
Assessment of requirements, programming and negotiation for securing 
technical assistance to Pakistan from foreign Governments organizations 
including nominations for EDI Courses. 
 
6. 
Omitted vide S.R.O.622(I)/2013, dated 28.06.2013. 
 
7. 
External debt management, including authorization of remittances for all 
external debt service, compilation and accounting and analysis of economic 
assistance from all foreign governments and organizations. 
 
8. 
Review and appraisal of international and regional economic trends and their 
impact on the national economy. Proposals concerning changes in 
International Economic Order. 
 
9. 
Matters relating to transfer of technology under UNDP assistance. 
 
 
10. 
Matters relating to International Islamic Development Bank. 
 
 
11. 
Omitted vide SRO 40 (1) /2019 dated 11-01-2019.  
 
 
12 &13 Omitted vide SRO1088 (I)/2011, dated 09.12.2011. 
 
 
14.  
Omitted vide SRO 40 (1) /2019 dated 11-01-2019.  
 
 
15. 
Omitted vide SRO1088(I)/2011, dated 09.12.2011. 
 
 
16. 
Omitted vide SRO 40 (1) /2019 dated 11-01-2019.  
 
 
17. 
 Omitted vide SRO 487 (1)/2019 dated 23-04-2019. 
 
 
18. 
Omitted vide SRO 40 (1) /2019 dated 11-01-2019.  
 
 
19. 
Omitted vide SRO 1013(I)/2012 dated 16.08.2012. 
 
 
20. 
Omitted vide SRO1088 (I)/2011 dated 09.12.2011. 
 

 
43
 
21. 
Omitted vide SRO 40 (1) /2019 dated 11-01-2019. 
  
 
22. 
Omitted vide SRO 1013(I)/2012 dated 16.08.2012 
 
 
23. 
Omitted vide SRO 40 (1) /2019 dated 11-01-2019.  
 
24. 
Omitted vide SRO 40 (1) /2019 dated 11-01-2019. 
 
25. 
Omitted vide SRO 1986 (I)/2024 dated 05-12-2024 
   
10. 
Establishment Division 
 
 
1. 
Regulation of all matters of general applicability to civil posts in connection 
with the affairs of the Federation. 
 
 
 
(i) 
Recruitment; 
 
 
(ia) 
Promotion; 
 
 
(ii) 
Verification of character and antecedents; 
 
 
(iii) 
Conduct and discipline; and 
(iv) 
Terms and conditions of service (including re-employment after retirement) 
other than those falling within the purview of the Finance Division. 
 
 
2. 
(i) 
Formation of Occupational Groups. 
 
 
 
(ii) 
Policy and administration of- 
 
 
 
(a) 
All-Pakistan Unified Grades; and 
 
 
 
(b) 
Office Management Group (Federal Unified Grades). 
 
 
3. 
Policy regarding recruitment to various grades. 
 
 
4. 
Grant of ex-officio status to non-Secretariat officers. 
  
 
5. 
(i) 
Training in Public Administration. 
                       (ii) 
Matters relating to- 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
Pakistan Administrative Staff College, Lahore; 
 
(b) 
National Institutes of Public Administration Karachi,  Quetta 
and Peshawar; 
 
(c) 
Pakistan Academy for Rural Development, Peshawar; and  
 
 
 
 
(d) 
Civil Services Academy, Lahore. 
 
 
6. 
Federal Government functions in regard to the Federal Public Service  
      
           Commission. 
 
 
7. 
General service matters, such as- 
 
 
 
(i) 
Casual leave; 
 
 
(ii) 
Office hours; 
 
 
(iii) 
Liveries of Government servants; 
 
 
(iv) 
Policy questions regarding association of Fed. Govt employees; 
 
 
(v) 
List of persons debarred from future employment under  
 
 
 
 
Government. 
 
           8. 
Matters relating to- 
 
 
 
(i) 
Central Selection Board; 
    (ii) 
Special Selection Board, except the Special Selection Boards 
constituted in the Divisions relating to selection of officers for posting 
in Pakistan Missions abroad. 
(iii) 
Selection Committee for Provincial Posts borne on All Pakistan 
Unified Grades; 

 
44
(iv) 
Omitted vide SRO 135(I)/98) dated 3.3.1998. 
 
 
9. 
(i) 
Career Planning; 
(ii) 
Instructions for writing and maintenance of Annual  Confidential 
Reports on civil servants; 
(iii) 
Centralized arrangements in managing original or duplicate Annual 
Confidential Reports dossiers of officers. 
 
 
10. 
(i) 
Staff Welfare; 
 
 
(ii) 
Federal Employees Benevolent Fund and Group Insurance Act, 1969. 
 
11. 
Service Tribunals Act, 1973. 
 
 
 
12. 
Administrative Reforms. 
 
13. 
Administration of the Civil Servants Act, 1973, and the rules made thereunder. 
 
 
14.  
To act as Management Consultants to the Federal Government and to 
 
undertake case studies to solve specific management problems utilizing 
 
techniques like PERT, CPM, system analysis, operations research and 
 
O&M. 
 
15. 
Review of organizations, functions and procedures of the Divisions, attached 
departments, all other Federal Government offices and departments, 
autonomous organizations and taken over industries with the objective of 
improving their efficiency. 
 
16. 
Periodical review of staff strength in the Divisions, attached departments and 
all other Federal Government Offices. 
 
17. 
Initiation of proposals for simplification of systems, forms, procedures and 
methods for efficient and economic execution of Government business, 
minimizing public inconvenience and evolution of built-in safeguards against 
corruption. 
18. 
Training of Government functionaries in techniques like O&M, CPM, PERT, 
systems analysis and operations research both within the country and abroad. 
 
19. 
Promotion of the knowledge and use of O&M concepts, PERT and CPM 
techniques, systems analysis and operations research within all government 
offices and organizations. 
 
 
 
20. 
Idea award scheme. 
 
 
 
21. 
Pakistan Public Administration Research Centre. 
 
22. 
(a) 
Reorganization of a Division or an attached department or a change in 
the status of an Attached Department. 
 
(b) 
Organization, on a permanent basis of a working unit in a Division 
other than as a Section. 
 
 
23. 
Determination of the status of Government offices. 
 
24.&25. Omitted vide SRO788 (I)/2011 dated 23.08.2011. 
 
26. 
Omitted vide SRO 964(I)/2014 dated 29.10.2014. 
 
11. 
Federal Education and Professional Training Division 
 
1.    National Vocational and Technical Education Commission (NAVTEC). 
 
2.    Omitted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 
 
3.    Federal Board of Intermediate and Secondary Education (FBISE), Islamabad. 
 
 
4.   Omitted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 
 
 

 
45
5.   Omitted vide SRO 964(I)/2014 dated 29.10.2014. 
 
 
6.   Omitted vide SRO 389 (I)/2013 dated   15.05.2013. 
 
 
7.   National Talent Pool, Islamabad. 
 
 
8.   Youth Centres. 
 
9.   All matters relating to National Commission for Human Development  
                 (NCHD) and National Education Foundation (NEF). 
 
 
10.  Pakistan National Commission for UNESCO (PNCU). 
 
11.   Higher Education Commission. 
 
 
12.   External examination and equivalence of degrees and diplomas. 
 
13.   Commission for standards for higher education. 
 
14.  Pakistan technical assistance programme in the field of education, professional 
and technical training. 
 
15.    National Institute of Science and Technical Education, Islamabad. 
 
16.    National College of Arts, Lahore and Rawalpindi. 
 
17.    Pakistan Chairs Abroad. 
 
18.   Selection of Scholars against Pakistan Chairs Abroad by the Special Selection 
Board. 
 
19.    Boy Scouts and Girl Guides; Youth Activities and Movement. 
 
20.    International exchange of students and teachers, foreign studies and training and 
international assistance in the field of education. 
 
  
21.    Omitted vide SRO 939(1)/2019 dated 19-08-2019.  
 
22.   Federal College of Education, Islamabad. 
 
23.    Federal Directorate of Education and education in the Capital. 
 
24.    Federal Government Polytechnic Institute of Women, Islamabad. 
 
25.    Omitted vide SRO 1373(1)/2021 dated 01-12-2021. 
 
26.     Omitted vide SRO 939(1)/2019 dated 19-08-2019. 
 
27.     Private Educational Institutions Regulatory Authority. 
 
28. 
Omitted vide SRO 939(1)/2019 dated 19-08-2019. 
 
29. 
Relationship with UNESCO and participation in its activities, liaison with 
 
other international agencies and organizations in educational programs. 
 
30. 
National Book Foundation. 
31. 
Awards of— 
 
(i) 
Izaz-e-Kamal; 
 
(ii) 
Izaz-e-Fazeelat; and 
 
(iii) 
Izaz-e-Sabqat. 
 
32. 
Inter Board Committee of Chairmen. 
33. 
Matters related to Deeni Madaris and mainstreaming of religious education.  
  
134.  Administrative functions in respect of the following laws, namely:–  
 
(a) 
The International Institute of Science, Arts and Technology Act, 2022 
(XIV of 2022); 
                                                          
1 Inserted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 

 
46
 
(b) 
The National Rahmatul-Lil-Aalameen Wa Khatamun Nabiyyin 
Authority Act, 2022 (XV of 2022); 
 
(c) 
The Dyslexia Special Measures Act, 2022 (XXIV of 2022); 
 
(d) 
The Smart Institute of Sciences & Technology Act, 2022 (XXXIV of 
2022); 
 
(e) 
The Pakistan Global Institute Act, 2023 (XI of 2023); 
 
(f) 
The Inter-Boards Coordination Commission Act, 2023 (XIII of 2023); 
 
(g) 
The Pakistan Institute of Research and Registration of Quality 
Assurance Act, 2023 (XXII of 2023);  
 
(h) 
The Pir Roshaan Institute of Progressive Sciences and Technologies, 
Miranshah Act, 2023 (XXV of 2023); 
 
(i) 
The Kalam Bibi International Women Institute Bannu Act, 2023 
(XXVII of 2023); 
 
(j) 
The Trained Paramedical Staff  Facility Act, 2023 (XXX of 2023); and 
 
(k) 
The Maternity and Paternity Leave Act, 2023 (XXXI of 2023). 
 
135.        Virtual University 
   
    
12. 
Finance Division 
 
1. 
Finances of the Federal Government and financial matters affecting the 
country as a whole. 
 
2. 
The Annual Budget Statement and the Supplementary and Excess Budget 
Statements to be laid before the National Assembly; the schedules of 
authorized expenditure. 
 
 
3. 
Accounts and audit. 
 
4. 
Allocation of share of each Provincial Government in the proceeds of divisible 
Federal Taxes; National Finance Commission. 
 
5. 
Public debt of the Federation both internal and external; borrowing money on 
the  
security of the Federal Consolidated Fund. 
 
 
6. 
Loans and advances by the Federal Government. 
 
7. 
Sanctions of internal and external expenditure requiring concurrence of the 
Finance Division. 
 
8. 
Advice on economic and financial policies; promotion of economic research. 
 
28A. 
Tax Policy, other than Tax Policy Functions relating to procedure mentioned 
under entry 1 of item 35. 
8B. 
Agreements relating to taxation policies (including avoidance of double 
taxation). 
 
 
9. 
Proper utilization of the country's foreign exchange resources. 
 
10. 
Currency, coinage and legal tender, Pakistan Security Printing Corporation 
                                                          
1 Inserted vide SRO 1986 (I)/2024 dated 05-12-2024 
2 Inserted vide SRO 855 (I)/2026 dated 11-05-2026 

 
47
and Pakistan Mint. 
 
11. 
Banking, investment, financial and other corporations, that is to say: 
 
 
(i) 
Central Banking; State Bank of Pakistan; 
(ii) 
Other banking (not including co-operative banking) and investment 
and financial corporations with objects and business not confined to 
one Province;   
 (iii) 
Incorporation, regulation and winding up of corporations including 
banking insurance and financial corporations not confined to or 
controlled by or carrying on business in one Province; and 
1(iv) 
business related to the Federal Government Properties Management 
Authority (FGPMA). 
 
12. 
Company Law: Accountancy. 
 
13. 
Investment policies: Capital issues (Continuance of Control) Act, 1947; 
statistics and research work pertaining to investment and capital. 
 
14. 
Stock exchanges and future markets with objects and business not confined to 
one Province; Securities Regulations. 
 
 
15. 
Financial settlement between Pakistan and India and division of assets and 
liabilities of the pre-independence Government of India. 
 
16. 
Framing of rules on pay and allowances, retirement benefits, leave benefits 
and other financial terms and conditions of service. 
 
 
17. 
Cost Accountancy. 
 
 
18. 
International Monetary Fund. 
 
 
19. 
Omitted vide SRO.294 (I)/2011 dated 08.04.2011. 
 
 
20. 
Monopoly Control and anti-Cartel Laws. 
 
           21to24.Omitted 
vide 
Cabinet 
Div. 
Notification 
No.4-14/98-Min.I, 
dated  
 
01.12.1998. 
 
         25. 
Deregulation policies. 
 
 
26. 
Administration of Economic Reforms Order, 1978. 
 
27. 
Negotiations with international organizations and other counties and 
implementation of agreements thereof. 
 
28-29. Omitted vide SRO 487 (1)/2019 dated 23-04-2019. 
 
30.       Omitted vide SRO 939(1)/2019 dated 19-08-2019. 
 
231. Administrative functions in respect of the following laws, namely:– 
 
(a) All Finance Acts; 
 
(b) The Export-Import Bank of Pakistan Act, 2022 (XXII of 2022); 
 
(c) Omitted vide SRO 687(I)/2026 dated 24-04-2026;  
 
(d) The Foreign Investment (Promotion and Protection) Act, 2022 (XXXV of 
2022); 
                                                          
1 Added vide SRO. 1373(1)/2021 dated 01-12-2021 
2 Inserted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 

 
48
 
(e) The State-Owned Enterprises (Governance and Operations) Act, 2023 (VII of 
2023); and 
 
(f) The Pakistan Sovereign Wealth Fund Act, 2023 (XLVIII of 2023). 
 
132. 
Strategic Digital Wallet Company. 
 
233. 
Tax Policy Office. 
 
13. 
Foreign Affairs Division 
 
1. 
Relations and dealings with other countries. 
 
 
2. 
Matters (other than those handled by other Divisions) relating to-- 
 
 
 
(a) 
international organizations and bodies and their decisions; and 
 
 
(b) 
agreements and treaties with other countries. 
 
3. 
Diplomatic, consular, trade and other representation abroad (Selection of 
officers for appointment as Commercial Secretaries, Attaches etc. shall 
continue to be made on the recommendations of the Special Selection Board 
and posting and transfer of such officer will be done by the Ministry 
concerned). 
 
4. 
Declaration of war upon, and the making of peace with any country. 
 
 
5. 
(i) 
Offences against the laws of nations. 
(ii) 
[Deleted vide Cabinet Division Notification No.4-16/94-Min.I, dated 
9.6.1996]. 
 
 
6. 
Foreign and extra-territorial jurisdiction. 
 
7. 
Negotiations for settlement of Kashmir dispute and implementation of 
agreements reached. 
 
8. 
(i) 
Administration of Foreign Service of Pakistan; 
 
 
(ii) 
Pakistan Missions abroad; 
 
 
(iii) 
Security and operation of cypher communications. 
 
9. 
Visits of the Heads of States and foreign dignitaries to Pakistan and the Head 
of the Government of Pakistan to foreign countries. 
 
 
10. 
(i) 
Protocol and matters relating to foreign representatives in Pakistan; 
 
 
(ii) 
Federal Government Guest Houses. 
 
 
11. 
(i) 
Policy regarding extradition to and from other countries. 
 
(ii) 
Repatriation of Pakistan nationals from abroad (other than those 
handled by other Divisions). 
 
 
12. 
Foreign awards to Pakistanis. 
 
 
13. 
Pakistan Institute of International Affairs. 
 
14. 
Coordination of all work pertaining to Economic Cooperation Organization 
(ECO). 
 
 
15. 
Institute of Strategic Studies. 
 
                                                          
1 Added vide SRO 687(I)/2026 dated 24-04-2026 
2 Added vide SRO 687(I)/2026 dated 24-04-2026 

 
49
16. 
Administration of Export Control on Goods, Technologies, Material and 
Equipment related to Nuclear and Biological Weapons and their Delivery 
System Act, 2004 (V of 2004). 
 
17. 
Omitted vide SRO 1088(I)/2011dated 09.12.2011. 
 
18. 
Welfare 
of 
Pakistani 
students 
abroad 
and 
foreign 
students 
in  
Pakistan. 
 
 
 
 
14. 
Housing and Works Division 
 
1. 
Acquisition of Federal Government buildings, except those under the Defence 
Division. 
 
2. 
Provision of Government owned office accommodation and residential 
accommodation, policy for acquisition, requisitioning and hiring of office and 
residential accommodation for officers and staff of the Federal Government. 
 
3. 
Fixation and recovery of rent of Government owned, hired and requisitioned 
buildings. 
 
4. 
Management of Federal lodges. 
 
5. 
Land and buildings belonging to the Federation wherever situated and 
revenues derived therefrom. 
 
6. 
Administration of the Federal Government Lands and Buildings (Recovery of 
Possession) Ordinance, 1965 (LIV of 1965). 
 
7. 
Matters relating to the Federal Government lands licenses to various 
cooperative housing societies in Karachi, except those under the Defence 
Division. 
 
8. 
Transfer of property, other than agricultural land, registration of deeds and 
documents. 
 
 
9. 
Omitted vide SRO 1373(1)/2021 dated 01-12-2021. 
 
 
10. 
National Housing Policy. 
 
 
111. 
Development of sites, construction, furnishing and maintenance of Federal 
Government buildings, except those under the Defence Division and Foreign 
Affairs Division. Exemption is also allowed to the Foreign Affairs Division 
for maintenance of Foreign Office buildings and allied buildings. A certain 
public work may be implemented by respective Division at its level after 
getting No Objection Certificate from the Housing and Works Division for the 
project with appropriate justification. The Housing and Works Division shall 
consider these requests on case to case basis. 
 
 
          12.   
(i) coordination of civil works budget; 
 
 
               
(ii) execution of Federal Government works. 
 
 
           13.  
Officers belonging to the Engineering Group. 
         
 
 
14.  
Matters relating to the National Construction (Domestic) Limited. 
 
15. 
Physical planning. 
216. 
Sindh Infrastructure Development Company Limited (SIDCL). 
                                                          
1 Substituted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 
2 Inserted vide SRO 1986 (I)/2024 dated 05-12-2024 

 
50
14A.  Human Rights Division 
 
 
1. 
Review of human rights situation in the country including implementation  
 
 
of laws, policies and measures. 
 
2.   
Coordination of activities of Ministries, 
Divisions 
and 
Provincial 
Governments in respect of human rights, and facilitation functions relating to 
human rights. 
 
 
3. 
Initiatives for harmonization of legislation, regulations and practices with    
 
the international human rights covenants and agreements to which Pakistan 
 
is a party and monitoring their implementation. 
 
4.  
Obtaining information, documents and reports, on complaints and allegations 
of human rights violations, from Ministries, Divisions, Provincial 
Governments and other agencies. 
 
5.   
Referring and recommending investigations and inquiries in respect of any 
incident of violation of human rights, including rights of disadvantaged and 
child rights.   
 
6.  
Pursuing or defending issues, complaints, representations and matters for and 
against Pakistan relating to human rights before any official or non-
Governmental organizations, body or forum in Pakistan and, in consultation 
with Foreign Affairs Division, before any international organization and 
foreign Government or non-Governmental organization. 
 
7.   
Representation of Pakistan in international bodies, organizations and 
conferences relating to human rights in consultation and conjunction with 
Foreign Affairs Division. 
8. 
Developing and conducting information programmes to foster public 
awareness about human rights including the rights of labour women and 
children and laws and remedies available to them. 
 
9.  
Formulating programmes for teaching of human rights at educational 
institutions. 
   
10.   
Provision of facilities for professional and technical training at national and 
international level relating to human rights issues. 
 
11    
Administrative control of the Tribunal for disadvantaged persons. 
   
12.   
Human rights NGOs 
 
13.  
Representing Pakistan at international and bilateral level, involving all gender 
related matters; 
 
14.       Administration of the  National Commission on the status of Women Act, 
2012 (VIII of 2012). 
 
 
15. 
Administration of the National Commission for Human Rights Act, 2012. 
 
16. 
Administration of the National Commission for Child Welfare and 
Development Resolution, 1981. 
 
17. 
Social Welfare, Special Education, welfare, development and rehabilitation of 
children and disabled in the Federal area. 
 
18. 
Training and education of disabled in Islamabad. 
  

 
51
19. 
Dealing and agreements with other countries and international organizations in 
the field of social welfare. 
 
20. 
Awards of— 
 
 
 
(i) 
President’s Medal Mohtarma Fatima Jinnah; and 
 
(ii) 
President’s Medal Mohtarma Shaheed Benazir Bhutto. 
 
121. 
National Commission for Minorities. 
 
15. 
Industries and Production Division 
 
1. 
National industrial planning and coordination. 
 
2. 
Industrial policy. 
 
3. 
Employment of foreign personnel in commercial and industrial enterprises. 
 
4. 
Federal agencies and institutions for:- 
i. 
promoting industrial productivity; 
ii. 
promoting of special studies in the industrial fields; and 
iii. 
testing industrial products. 
 
5. 
Keeping a watch, from the national angle, over general price trends and supply 
position of essential commodities; price and distribution control over items to 
be distributed by statutory orders between the Provinces. 
 
6. 
Omitted vide SRO 973(1)/2017 dated 25-09-2017 (F.N.4-2/2016-Min-I). 
 
7. 
Import and distribution of white oil. 
 
8. 
Explosive (excluding the administration of Explosive Substances Act, 1908) 
and safety measures under the Petroleum Act, 1934 and Rules made 
thereunder. 
9. 
Prescription and review of criteria for assessment of spare parts and raw 
materials for industries. 
 
10. 
Administration on law on Boilers. 
 
11. 
Administrative, financial, operational, personnel and commercial matters of 
Pakistan Garments Corporation. 
 
12. 
Ghee Corporation of Pakistan Limited, and Pakistan Edible Oils Corporation 
Limited. 
 
 
13. 
National Fertilizer Corporation, Lahore. 
 
14. 
Development of Industries (Federal Control) (Repeal) Ordinance, 1979. 
 
15. 
Economic Reforms (Protection of Industries) Regulation, 1972 (Regulation 
No. 125 of 1972). 
 
 
16. 
All matters relating to state industrial enterprises, especially, in basic and 
heavy industries, namely:- 
 
(a)    
State Engineering Corporation, Karachi. 
(b)  
State Cement Corporation, Lahore. 
(c)       Pakistan Automobile Corporation, Karachi. 
(d)  
State Petroleum Refining and Petrochemical Corporation, Karachi. 
(e)  
Federal Chemical and Ceramics Corporation, Karachi. 
(f)  
Pakistan Steel Mills Corporation, Karachi. 
(g)  
Pakistan Industrial Development Corporation (PIDC);  
 
                                                          
1 Added vide SRO 964(I)/2025 dated 2nd June, 2025 

 
52
17. 
Any other industrial enterprises assigned to the Division. 
 
18. 
Omitted vide SRO 964(I)/2025 dated 2nd June, 2025 
 
119.  
Administrative functions in respect of the Pakistan General Cosmetics Act, 
2023 (XLIII of 2023). 
 
220. 
Small and Medium Enterprises Development Authority (SMEDA).  
 
16. 
Information and Broadcasting Division 
 
1. 
Policy relating to internal publicity on national matters including the 
administration of the provisions of the Post Office, Act, 1898, and section 5 
(1) (b) of the Telegraph Act, 1885, in so far as they relate to the Press. 
 
 
2. 
Broadcasting including television. 
 
3. 
Production of films on behalf of Government, its agencies, Government 
controlled Corporations, etc. 
 
4. 
Press relations, including delegations of journalists and other information media. 
 
 
5. 
Provision of facilities for the development of newspapers industry. 
 
6. 
(i) 
Policy regarding government advertisement; control of advertisement 
and placement; 
 
 
(ii) 
Audit of circulation of newspapers. 
 
 
 
 
7. 
Administration of the Newsprint Control Ordinance, 1971. 
 
8. 
National Anthem  
 
9. 
Liaison and coordination with agencies and media on matters concerning 
Government policies and activities. 
 
 
10. 
Administration of the Information Group. 
 
 
11. 
External Publicity. 
 
 
12. 
Pakistan National Centres. 
 
 
13. 
(i) 
Administration of- 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
Pakistan Broadcasting Corporation Act, 1973; 
(b) 
Associated Press of Pakistan (Taking Over) Ordinance, 1961; and 
  (c)  
Pakistan Electronic Media Regulatory Authority. 
 
 
 
 (ii) 
Matters relating to- 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
The Pakistan Television Corporation; and  
 
 
 
(b) 
Omitted vide SRO NO.48 (1)/2016 dated 26.1.2016. 
                                    (c)       Shalimar Recording and Broadcasting Company.  
 
 
14. 
Training facilities for Radio and Television personnel. 
 
15. 
Special Selection Board for selection of Press Officers for posting in Pakistan 
Missions abroad. 
 
 
16.  
Omitted vide SRO1088 (I)/2011, dated 09.12.2011. 
 
17. 
Establishment of tourists centers abroad. 
 
 
18. 
Administration of the Newspapers Employees (Conditions of Service)  
                                                          
1 Inserted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 
2 Inserted vide SRO 1986 (I)/2024 dated 05-12-2024 

 
53
 
 
Act, 1973(LVIII of 1973). 
 
 19. 
(i)    Omitted vide SRO 939(1)/2019 dated 19-08-2019. 
 
 
(ii)   Omitted vide SRO 939(1)/2019 dated 19-08-2019. 
 
 
20. 
Omitted vide SRO 939(1)/2019 dated 19-08-2019. 
 
 
 
21.  
Omitted vide SRO No.48 (1)/2016 dated 26.1.2016. 
 
 
            22. 
Omitted vide SRO 40(1)/2019 dated 11-01-2019. 
 
            23 to 30 Omitted vide SRO No.48 (1)/2016 dated 26.1.2016. 
 
 
31. 
Promotion and projection of Government policies through digital media. 
 
 
32.  
Press Council of Pakistan. 
 
 
33. 
National Press Trust. 
134. 
Administrative functions in respect of the following laws, namely:–   
 
(a) The Protection of Journalists and Media Professionals Act, 2021 (XXIII 
of 2021) ; and 
 
(b) The Access to the Media (Deaf) Persons Act, 2022 (XL of 2022). 
 
 
235. 
Pakistan Information Commission. 
 
17.  
Information Technology and Telecommunication Division 
 
 
1. 
Preparation of an overall integrated plan as well as formulation of policy for 
the development and improvement of Information Technology and 
Telecommunications, including related infrastructure, in Pakistan. 
 
2. 
Co-ordination with the Provincial Governments, autonomous bodies, private 
sector, international organizations and foreign countries in respect of 
information technology and telecommunications. 
 
3. 
Human resource development in the field of information technology and 
telecommunications. 
 
4. 
Promotion of information technology applications.  
 
5. 
Providing guidelines for the standardization of software for use within the 
Government.  
 
6. 
Planning, 
policy 
making 
and 
legislation 
covering 
all 
aspects 
of 
telecommunications excluding radio and television and issuance of policy 
directives. 
  
37. 
Matters relating to National Information Technology Board, Pakistan Software 
Export Board and the Electronic Government Directorate. 
 
8. 
All matters relating to National Telecommunication Corporation (NTC), 
Telecommunications Foundation (TF), Special Communications Organization 
(SCO) [4] and Electronic Certification Accreditation Council. 
 
9. 
Omitted vide SRO 83(I)/2025 dated 4th February, 2025 
                                                          
1 Inserted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 
2 Added vide SRO 687(I)/2026 dated 24-04-2026 
3 Substituted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 
4 Omitted vide SRO 1986 (I)/2024 dated 05-12-2024 

 
54
 
10. 
Safeguard interest of Government of Pakistan in entities having public shares 
or government equity like PTCL, USF Co & ICT R&D Co. 
 
11. 
Omitted vide SRO 939(1)/2019 dated 19-08-2019. 
 
112. 
Administrative functions in respect of the National Information Technology 
Board Act, 2022 (XVII of 2022). 
 
 
213. 
Pakistan Digital Authority (PDA). 
 
317A.      Intelligence Bureau Division 
 
     
    1. 
Matters relating and ancillary to Federal Intelligence. 
 
 
 
18. 
  4Interior and Narcotics Control Division 
 
1. 
Internal security; matters relating to public security arising out of dealings and 
agreements with other countries and international organizations. 
 
2. 
Preventive detention for reasons of State connected with defence, external 
affairs or the security of Pakistan or any part thereof; and for reasons, 
connected with the maintenance of public order or the maintenance of supplies 
and services essential to the community; persons subjected to such detention. 
 
 
3. 
Nationality, citizenship and naturalization. 
 
4. 
Admission of persons into, and expulsion of persons from Pakistan, 
including:- 
 
(a) 
policy regarding entry, exit and sojourn of foreigners and aliens; and 
(b) 
regulation of movement in Pakistan of persons not domiciled in Pakistan. 
 
5. 
Admission of persons into, and departure of persons from Pakistan, including:- 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
policy regarding immigration; 
 
(b) 
passports, visas, permits for entries and exits and other such 
certificates; and 
 
 
 
(c) 
extradition and expulsions from Pakistan. 
 
6. 
Omitted vide SRO 294(I)/2011, dated 08.04.2011. 
 
7. 
Policy regarding censorship; prescription of books and publications in 
consultation with the Education Division, where necessary. 
 
8. 
National Database and National Data Warehouse for issuance of National 
Identity Cards, Pakistan Origin Cards and Aliens Registration Cards. 
 
9. 
Omitted vide Cabinet Division Notification No. 4-5/99-Min.I, dated 3rd June, 
1999. 
 
10. Security measures for the Federal Secretariat and Attached Departments and 
Subordinate Offices. 
 
11. Pardons, reprieves, respites, remissions, commutation, etc. (excluding 
personnel belonging to the Armed Forces), issuance of warrant of execution of 
death sentence. 
 
                                                          
1 Inserted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 
2 Added vide SRO 687(I)/2026 dated 24-04-2026 
3 Inserted vide SRO 1986 (I)/2024 dated 05-12-2024 
4 Substituted vide SRO 83(I)/2025 dated 4th February, 2025 

 
55
 
 
12. Police Commission and Police awards. 
 
13. Policy coordination of, and higher training in Civil Defence and A.R.P. matters. 
 
14. Omitted vide SRO 1175(I)/2021, dated 14.09.2021. 
 
15. Celebrations and ceremonial parades (other than those of Armed Forces); 
action to be taken on the death of high officials; civil uniform rules. 
 
16. Omitted vide S.R.O.294 (I)/2011 dated 08.04.2011. 
 
17. Omitted vide S.R.O.294 (I)/2011dated 08.04.2011. 
 
 
18. Coordination of policy matters relating to Police. 
 
19. Coordination of anti-smuggling measures. 
 
20. Matters relating to Federal Police Forces, their establishment etc. 
 
21. Administrative Control of the Civil Armed Forces (i.e. Frontier Corps 
including Balochistan Constabulary and Frontier Constabulary) Rangers and 
Coast Guards. 
 
 
22. Arms Act jurisdictions to Federal areas. 
 
23. Border incidents and disputes. 
 
24. Permission to Government servants to visit India. 
 
25. Political asylum.  
 
 
 26. Genocide. 
 
27. Surrender of criminals and accused persons to Government outside Pakistan. 
 
28. Special studies of penal reforms in the context of national mores and 
requirements; coordination of reforms by the Provinces and provisions of 
facilities for professional and technical training of jail staff, at home and 
abroad; and dealing with such items pertaining to prisons, etc., as are 
embodied in the Federal and i[Provincial Subjects]. 
 
29. Protection and maintenance of non-Muslim shrines in Pakistan and 
pilgrimages from India. 
 
 
30. Administrative Control of National Police Academy. 
 
 
31. All Administrative matters relating to Federal Investigation Agency. 
 
32. Investigation and prosecution of cases falling under the Schedule appended to 
the Federal Investigation Agency Act, 1974. 
 
 
33. To act as National Central Bureau to keep liaison with the INTERPOL. 
 
 
34. Anti-Corruption laws, [except the National Accountability Ordinance, 1999                     
  
(XVIII of 1999)]. 
 
         35. Omitted vide SRO 226(I)/2010 (F.No.4-4/2007-Min-I), dated 02.04.2010. 
 
36. Islamabad Capital Territory Administration. 
 
        37. Omitted vide S.R.O. 294 (I)/ 2011 dated 04.2011. 
 
       38.     Advocate General (ICT). 
 
39.     Metropolitan Corporation Islamabad. 
 

 
56
40.     Capital Development Authority. 
 
            
41.     Management and distribution of zakat and ushr in Islamabad. 
  
 
 
  
 
42. National Counter Terrorism Authority (NACTA). 
 
               143.   Administrative functions in respect of the following laws, namely:– 
 
(a) 
The Islamabad Capital Territory Local Government Act, 2015 (X of 
2015); 
 
(b) 
The Islamabad Capital Territory Domestic Workers Act, 2022(XXV of 
2022); 
 
(c) 
The Torture and Custodial Death (Prevention and Punishment) Act, 
2022 (XXVIII of 2022); 
 
(d) 
The Islamabad Capital Territory Prohibition of Interest on Private 
Loans Act, 2023 (III of 2023); 
 
(e) 
The Day Care Centres Act, 2023 (XXVIII of 2023);  
 
(f) 
The Federal Prosecution Service Act, 2023 (LXV of 2023);  
 
(g) 
2the Prevention of Electronic Crimes Act, 2016 (XL of 2016) and the 
rules made thereunder; and 
 
(h) 
3National Forensics Agency Act, 2024 (XXXVII of 2024).  
 
444.   Policy on all aspects of narcotics and dangerous drugs, such as production, 
processing, marketing, import, export and transshipment, prevention of 
trafficking, etc. in conformity with national objectives, laws and international 
conventions and agreements. 
 
45. 
Legislation covering all aspects of narcotics and psychotropic substances, 
and matters ancillary thereto, in consultation with the concerned Divisions, 
etc.  
 
46. 
Bilateral and multilateral cooperation with foreign countries against narcotics 
trafficking and all other international aspects of narcotics including 
negotiations for bilateral and multilateral agreements for mutual assistance 
and cooperation in the field of enforcement of narcotics laws. 
 
47. 
Coordination of aid and assistance from foreign countries and of narcotics 
control interdiction for poppy crop substitution. 
 
48. 
Policy on drug education, treatment and rehabilitation of narcotics and 
drugs addicts and grants-in-aid to Non-Governmental Organizations 
(NGOs) engaged in these fields. 
 
49. 
Inter-Provincial coordination on all aspects of narcotics and dangerous 
drugs. 
 
50. 
Monitoring of the implementation of policies on all aspects of narcotics and 
                                                          
1 Inserted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 
2 Inserted vide SRO 83(I)/2025 dated 4th February, 2025 
3 Added vide SRO 964(I)/2025 dated 2nd June, 2025 
4 Inserted vide SRO 83(I)/2025 dated 4th February, 2025 

 
57
dangerous drugs. 
 
51. 
Regulation of administrative, budgetary and other matters of Pakistan 
Narcotics Control Board. 
 
152. 
National Forensics Agency. 
 
 253. 
Pakistan Land Ports Authority (PLPA). 
 
  354. 
Social Media Protection and Regulatory Authority. 
 
 
19. 
Inter-Provincial Coordination Division 
 
1. 
General coordination between the Federal Government and the Provinces in 
the economic, cultural and administrative fields. 
 
2. 
Promoting uniformity of approach in formulation of policy and 
implementation among the Provinces and the Federal Government in all fields 
of common concern. 
 
3.  
Discussions of policy issues emanating from the Provinces which have 
administrative or economic implications for the country as a whole. 
 
4.      Omitted vide SRO 1373(1)/2021 dated 01-12-2021. 
 
5.      Any other matter referred to the Division by a Province or any of the Ministry 
or Division of the Federal Government. 
 
6 &7  Omitted vide SRO 1088(I)/2011, dated 09.12.2011. 
 
8.        Omitted vide SRO 850(I)/2014, dated 25.09.2014. 
 
9. 
    Malam Jabba Resort Ltd. 
 
10.    Omitted vide SRO 964(I)/2025 dated 2nd June, 2025 
 
11, 12 &13. Omitted vide SRO 1088(I)/2011 dated 09.12.2011. 
 
14.  
Omitted vide SRO 1025(1)/2020 dated 8th October, 2020. 
 
15-19. Omitted vide SRO 1088(I)/2011, dated 09.12.2011. 
 
20.     Medical, nursing, dental, pharmaceutical, para-medical and allied subjects;- 
        
(a) 
education abroad; and 
 
 
 
4(b) 
educational facilities for backward areas and for foreign nationals,   
 
21-29. Omitted vide SRO 1088(I)/2011, dated 09.12.2011. 
 
30.    {Transferred to Human Resource Development Division vide S.R.O. 
No. 1001(I)2011, dated 27-10-2011}. 
   
 
31 to 34. Omitted vide SRO788 (I)/2011, dated 23.08.2011. 
 
35.     Legislation covering all aspects of sports affairs and matters ancillary thereto. 
 
36.      Administrative control of Board established for the promotion and 
development of sports under the Sports (Development and Control) 
Ordinance, 1962 (XVI of 1962). 
 
37.     Pakistan Sports Board (PSB). 
 
                                                          
1 Added vide SRO 964(I)/2025 dated 2nd June, 2025 
2 Added vide SRO 687(I)/2026 dated 24-04-2026 
3 Added vide SRO 687(I)/2026 dated 24-04-2026 
4 Substituted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 

 
58
38.       Omitted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 
 
39.  
Omitted vide SRO 793 (1)/2018 dated 25-06-2018. 
  
40. 
Omitted vide SRO 389 (I)/2013, dated 15.05.2013. 
 
41. 
Dealing and agreements with other countries and international organizations in 
matters relating to Youth Exchange Programmes (External). 
 
42. 
National Internship Programme. 
43. 
National Volunteer Movement. 
 
44. 
Paralympics. 
 
            45.       Gun and Country Club. 
 
 
46. 
Federal Land Commission. 
 
 
47.      International Organizations and agreements relating to tourism. 
 
148.   Administrative functions in respect of the Gun and Country Club Act, 2023         
(LI of 2023). 
  
249. Pakistan Tourism Development Corporation (PTDC).  
 
  
20.      3Kashmir Affairs, Gilgit-Baltistan and States and Frontier Regions Division                             
 
1. 
Policy, Planning and Development for Gilgit-Baltistan.  
 
 
2. 
Co-ordination with the Government of Gilgit-Baltistan and Gilgit-Baltistan 
Council.  
 
3. 
Co-ordination with the Azad Government of the State of Jammu and Kashmir 
and the AJ&K Council. 
 
4. 
Matters relating to the Settlement of Kashmir dispute, other than those falling 
within the purview of the Foreign Affairs Division.  
 
5. 
Administration of Jammu and Kashmir State Property in Pakistan.  
 
6. 
Processing of development schemes reflected in the PSDP of M/o Kashmir 
Affairs and Gilgit-Baltistan at the level of CDWP and ECNEC. 
 
7. 
Co-ordination between the Federal Government Organizations and the 
Government of Gilgit-Baltistan and the Gilgit-Baltistan Council. 
 
8. 
Omitted vide SRO 83(I)/2025 dated 4th February, 2025 
 
9.   
Omitted vide SRO 83(I)/2025 dated 4th February, 2025 
 
10. 
4Coordinate with the Federal Public Service Commission on recruitment of 
various departments of Gilgit-Baltistan. 
 
 
11. 
Assisting Judicial Commissions on Boundary Disputes in ascertaining facts 
which are directly related with the national interests of Pakistan. 
 
 
12. 
Afghan Refugees. 
 
 
13. 
Affairs of the former and acceding States. 
 
 
                                                          
1 Inserted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 
2 Added vide SRO 687(I)/2026 dated 24-04-2026 
3 Substituted vide SRO 83(I)/2025 dated 4th February, 2025 
4 Inserted vide SRO 83(I)/2025 dated 4th February, 2025 

 
59
 
 
21. 
Law and Justice Division 
 
1. 
Advice to Divisions on all legal and constitutional questions arising out of any 
case and on the interpretation of any law. 
 
 
2. 
Advice to Provincial Governments on legal and legislative matters. 
 
3. 
Drafting, scrutiny and examination of Bills, Ordinances, and all legal and 
other instruments. 
 
4. 
Dealings and agreements with other countries and International organizations 
in judicial and legal matters. 
 
5. 
Arrangements for the publication and translation of Federal Laws and other 
statutory rules and orders; copyright in Government Law publications. 
 
6.  
Adaptation of existing laws to bring them in conformity with the Constitution. 
 
 
7.  
Legal proceedings and litigation concerning the Federal Government except 
the litigation concerning Revenue Division. 
 
8.  
Administrative control of the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal and the 
Customs, Central Excise and Sales Tax Appellate Tribunal. 
 
9.  
Special Judges under the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1958. 
 
10.  
1Federal Government functions in regard to the Supreme Court, Supreme 
Judicial Council, High Courts, Federal Shariat Court, Federal Ombudsman, 
Tax Ombudsman, Insurance Ombudsman, Banking Mohtasib and Federal 
Ombudsperson for Protection against Harassment of Women at the 
Workplace. 
 
11.  
Attorney General and other Law Officers of the Federation. 
 
 
12. 
Federal functions in respect of the Family Law Ordinance and the Conciliation 
Courts Ordinance. 
 
13. 
Consultation with the Attorney General for Pakistan, etc. 
 
14.  
Courts and Tribunals, whether administrative or otherwise, for the Federal 
subjects. 
 
15.  
Wills, 
intestacy 
and 
succession 
in 
respect 
of 
Federal 
areas,  
save as regards agricultural land. 
 
16.  
Bankruptcy 
and 
insolvency, 
administrator 
general 
and 
official  
trustees in respect of Federal areas. 
 
17.  
Arbitration 
in 
respect 
of 
Federal 
areas 
and 
International  
arbitration. 
 
18. 
Trust and trustees in respect of Federal areas. 
 
 
19. 
Legal Practitioners and Bar Councils Act, 1973 (XXXV of 1973).   
 
20.  
Omitted vide SRO 428 (1)/2018 dated 04-04-2018. 
 
21.   
The Law and Justice Commission Ordinance, 1979 (XIV of 1979) and Federal 
Government functions related to the Commission. 
 
                                                          
1 Substituted vide SRO 964(I)/2025 dated 2nd June, 2025 

 
60
22.  
The Federal Judicial Academy Act, 1997 (XXVIII of 1997) and Federal  
 
 
Government functions related to the Academy.  
 
23. 
Federal Government functions in regard to the National Accountability 
Bureau. 
 
24.  
National Accountability Ordinance, 1999 (XVIII of 1999.) 
 
25. 
Omitted vide SRO 964(I)/2025 dated 2nd June, 2025 
 
26.  
Issuance of legal opinion for disbursement and drawdown. 
 
 
27. 
Council of Islamic Ideology. 
128. 
Legal Aid and Justice Authority. 
229. 
Administrative functions in respect of the following laws, namely:– 
 
a) Legal Aid and Justice Authority Act, 2020 (XVI of  2020);  
 
b) The Lawyers Welfare and Protection Act, 2023 (XII of 2023); 
 
c) The Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023 (XVII of 
2023); and  
 
d) The Supreme Court (Review of Judgements and Orders) Act, 2023 
(XXIII of 2023). 
 
321A. 
Maritime Affairs Division 
 
 
1. 
National Planning, research and international aspects of –   
 
i) 
Inland water transport; and 
ii) 
Coastal shipping within the same Province. 
 
2. 
Diverted cargo belonging to the Federal Government. 
 
3. 
Navigation and shipping, including coastal shipping but not including shipping 
confined to one Province; safety of ports and regulation of matters relating to 
dangerous cargo. 
 
4. 
Omitted vide SRO.294 (I)/2011, dated 08.04.2011. 
 
5. 
Light-houses, including lightships, beacons and other provisions for safety of 
shipping. 
 
6. 
Admiralty jurisdiction; offenses committed on the high seas. 
 
7. 
Declaration and delimitation of major ports and the constitution and power of 
authorities in such ports. 
 
8. 
Mercantile marine; planning for development and rehabilitation of Pakistan 
merchant navy; international shipping and maritime conferences and 
ratification of their conventions; training of seamen; pool for national shipping. 
 
9. 
Korangi Fisheries Harbour Authority, Karachi. 
 
10. 
Office for promotion of Deep Sea Fisheries Resources in Exclusive Economic 
Zone. 
 
11. 
Fishing and Fisheries beyond territorial waters. 
 
12. 
Quality Control Laboratory Karachi. 
 
                                                          
1 Inserted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 
2 Inserted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 
3 Inserted vide SRO 1262(1)/2017 dated 20-12-2017 

 
61
13. 
Marine Fisheries Research Laboratory Karachi. 
 
14. 
Fisheries Training Centre/Deep Sea Fishing Vessel. 
 
15. 
Oceanography and Hydrological Research. 
 
16. 
Marine Biological Research Laboratory, Karachi. 
 
17. 
Welfare of Seamen; seamen Hostel Karachi. 
 
118. 
Administrative functions in respect of the Pakistan Maritime Zones Act, 
 
2023 (XVIII of 2023). 
 
 
22. 
Omitted vide SRO 83(I)/2025 dated 4th February, 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23.       National Food Security and Research Division  
 
1.  
Economic coordination and planning in respect of food, economic planning and 
policy making in respect of agriculture. 
 
2.  
Imports and exports control on food grains and foodstuffs, inspection, grading 
analysis of food grains and foodstuffs, maintenance of standards of quality for 
import and export and inspection, handling, storage and shipment of rice 
exports. 
 
3.  
Collection of statistics regarding production, consumption, prices, imports and 
exports of food grains. 
 
4.  
Coordination with aid and assistance agencies in respect of food sector. 
 
5.  
Pakistan Agricultural Research Council and other Federal agriculture research 
organizations. 
 
6.  
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of United Nations in respect of food. 
 
7.  
Plant protection, pesticide import and standardization, aerial spray, plant 
quarantine and locust control in its international aspect and maintenance of 
locusts warning organizations. 
 
8.  
Federal seed certification and registration. 
 
9.  
Standardization and import of fertilizer. 
 
10.     Procurement of food grains, including sugar- 
 
(a) from abroad; 
(b)   for Federal requirement; 
(c) for inter-Provincial supplies; and 
(d) for export and storage at ports. 
 
 
11.     Grading of agricultural commodities, other than food grains, for exports. 
 
12. 
Administrative control of PASSCO. 
 
13. 
Preparation of basic plan for bulk allocation of food grains and foodstuffs. 
 
14. Price stabilization by fixing procurement and issue prices including keeping a 
watch over the price of food grains and foodstuffs imported from abroad or 
required for export and those required for inter-provincial supplies. 
 
 
15. Agricultural Policy Institute. 
 
 
  
16.     (i)  Animal quarantine departments, stations and facilities located anywhere      
     in Pakistan. 
                                                          
1 Inserted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 

 
62
 
    (ii)  National Veterinary Laboratory, Islamabad. 
         (iii) Laboratory for Detection of Drugs Residues in Animal Products at  
     Karachi. 
 
17. Veterinary drugs, vaccines and animal feed additives’- 
(i) import and export; and 
(ii) procurement from abroad for Federal requirements and for inter-provincial 
supplies.  
  
 
 
18.  
Livestock, poultry and livestock products’-  
(i) import and export; and 
(ii) laying down national grades. 
 
 
19. 
Pakistan Dairy Development Company. 
 
20. 
 Livestock and Dairy Development Board (LDDB). 
 
21. 
 Fisheries Development Board (FDB). 
 
22. 
 Pakistan Oil-Seed Department. 
 
23. 
 International cooperation matters relating to agriculture and livestock. 
 
24.    Administrative control of the Agricultural Counselor’s Office at Rome, 
 Italy. 
 
25.    National Fertilizer Development Centre. 
             
            26.  
Administrative control of Pakistan Central Cotton Committee. 
 
127.    Pakistan Cotton Standard Institute. 
 
228. National Seed Development and Regulatory Authority (NSDRA). 
 
29. 
Sugar Advisory Board (SAB). 
 
30. 
Pakistan Veterinary Medical Council (PVMC). 
 
31. 
Fertilizer Review Committee (FRC). 
 
332. National Agri-Trade and Food Safety Authority (NAFSA). 
  
433. Pakistan Tobacco Board. 
 
 
24.        National Health Services, Regulations and Coordination Division  
 
1. 
Pakistan Medical and Dental Council. 
 
2. 
Pakistan Council for Nursing. 
 
3. 
College of Physicians and Surgeons. 
 
4. 
National Councils for Tibb and Homeopathy. 
 
5. 
Pharmacy Council of Pakistan. 
 
6. 
National associations in medical and allied fields such as Pakistan Red 
Crescent Society and TB Association. 
 
57. 
Border Health Services Pakistan. 
                                                          
1 Inserted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 
2 Added vide SRO 964(I)/2025 dated 2nd June, 2025 
3 Added vide SRO 687(I)/2026 dated 24-04-2026 
4 Added vide SRO 687(I)/2026 dated 24-04-2026 
5 Substituted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 

 
63
 
8. 
Drug Regulatory Authority of Pakistan. 
 
9. 
International aspects of medical facilities and public health, International 
Health Regulations, health and medical facilities abroad. 
 
10. 
National Institute of Health. 
 
111. 
National Emergency Health Services. 
 
12. 
Pakistan Medical Research Council. 
 
13. 
Health Services Academy, Islamabad. 
14. 
Coordination of Vertical Health Programmes including interaction with 
GAVI, EPI and the Global Fund for AIDS, TB, Hepatitis and Malaria. 
 
15. 
National Planning and Coordination in the field of health. 
 
16. 
Planning and Development Policies pertaining to Population Programmes in 
the country. 
 
17. 
2Matters relating to National Trust for Population Welfare. 
 
18. 
Mainstreaming population factor in development planning. 
 
19. 
Directorate of Central Warehouse and Supplies, Karachi. 
 
 
20.      Human Organ Transplant Authority. 
 
21.      Charitable endowments for Federal area. 
 
22.      Medical and health services for Federal Government employees. 
 
23.     Administrative control of the National Institute of Handicapped,  Islamabad. 
 
24.     Shaheed Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto Medical University, Islamabad. 
   
  25.     Federal Medical and Dental College, Islamabad. 
 
  26.    Federal General Hospital, Islamabad.  
 
              27.    National Institute of Rehabilitative Medicine. 
 
              28.    District Population Welfare Office. 
 
              329. Dealing and agreements with other countries and international  
 
 
 
organizations in matters relating to Population Planning Programs. 
 
              430.  Dealing and agreements with other countries and international  
 
 
 
organizations in the field of health, drugs and medical facilities abroad. 
 
              531.  Scholarships / fellowships, training courses in health from International  
 
 
Agencies such as W.H.O. and UNICEF. 
 
              632.   Federal Government Tuberculosis Centre, Rawalpindi. 
 
 
 
33. Shaikh Zayed Postgraduate Medical Institute, Lahore. 
 
734.  Administrative functions in respect of the following laws, namely:– 
                                                          
1 Substituted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 
2 Substituted vide SRO 964(I)/2025 dated 2nd June, 2025 
3 Added vide SRO 40 (1)/2019 dated 11-01-2019 
4 Added vide SRO 40 (1)/2019 dated 11-01-2019 
 
5 Added vide SRO 40 (1)/2019 dated 11-01-2019 
6 Added vide SRO 487 (1)/2019 dated 23-04-2019 
7 Inserted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 

 
64
 
(a)  The Allied Health Professionals Council Act, 2022 (IX of 2022); 
 
(b) The Pakistan Medical and Dental Council Act, 2022 (IV of 2023); and 
 
(c)  The Pakistan Institute of Medical Sciences (PIMS) Act, 2023 (I of 2023). 
 
             
25.   
National Heritage and Culture Division  
1. 
International agreements and assistance in the field of archaeology, national 
museums and historical monuments declared to be of national importance. 
 
2. 
Quaid-e-Azam Papers Wing. 
 
3. 
Pakistan Academy of Letters. 
 
 
4. 
Urdu Dictionary Board and Urdu Science Board. 
 
5. 
National and other languages used for official purposes. 
 
6. 
Quaid-e-Azam Academy. 
 
7. 
Aiwan-i-Iqbal and Iqbal Academy Pakistan. 
 
8. 
Quaid-e-Azam Mazar Management Board (QMMB). 
 
9. 
Quaid-e-Azam Memorial Fund. 
 
 
10. Omitted vide SRO 634(1)/2016, dated 22.7.2016. 
 
11. Naming of institutions in the name of Quaid-e-Azam and other high and 
distinguished personages. 
 
12. Omitted vide SRO 1025(1)/2020, dated 8th October, 2020. 
 
13. National Library of Pakistan. 
 
14. National Institute of Folk and Traditional Heritage of Pakistan (Lok Virsa). 
 
15. Pakistan National Council of Arts. 
 
16. Cultural pacts and protocols with other countries. 
 
 
 
17. Federal Government’s Artists’ Welfare Fund. 
 
 
 
 
 
118. Aiwan-e-Quaid Building. 
 
26.   
    National Security Division 
1. 
Function as Secretariat of the National Security Committee (NSC). 
 
2. 
Convene meetings of the National Security Committee. 
 
3. 
Collect, coordinate and collate proposals and input from all relevant Ministries 
 
 
and organizations for consideration of the NSC. 
 
4. 
Formulation comprehensive National Security Policy (NSP) for approval of 
 
 
the National Security Committee as well as ensure its sustainability through 
 
 
monitoring of its implementation and undertaking periodical review and  
 
 
updation in consultation with all the stakeholders as required. 
 
5. 
Coordinate the implementation of strategies and policies approved by the NSC 
 
 
through relevant Ministries and organizations. 
 
6. 
Develop national narrative to promote the national security vision outlined in 
                                                          
1 Added vide SRO. 1373(1)/2021 dated 01-12-2021 

 
65
 
the NSP and to counter the negative and obscurantist ideology of the 
 
extremists, terrorists and militants.  
 
7. 
Provide administrative and financial management support to the functionally 
 
 
independent Strategic Policy Planning Cell (SPPC) and coordinate all  
 
 
intellectual and research and dialogue-based activities through the SPPC. 
 
8. 
Brief the Parliament and its Committees on national security related issues. 
 
9. 
Conduct national security dialogue with other countries in consultation with 
 
 
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 
 
10. 
Interact with counterpart National Security Councils of other countries. 
111. 
Organize Islamabad Security Dialogue on regular basis. 
 
 
27.  
Overseas Pakistanis and Human Resource Development Division 
 
1. 
National policy, planning and coordination regarding manpower development 
and employment promotion for intending overseas workers. 
2. 
Preparation of short and long-term programmes for manpower development 
and employment promotion abroad. 
 
 
3. 
Research into problems of overseas Pakistanis; promotion and coordination of 
measures best suited to resolving them and motivating Pakistani citizens 
abroad to strengthen their links with the mother country. 
 
4. 
Policy for linkages between the training of workers/labour force with the latest 
requirements abroad. 
 
5. 
Linkage of training imparted at training institutes like National Training 
Bureau, Pakistan Manpower Institute etc. with the efforts for increase in 
manpower export through Overseas Employment Corporation and Bureau of 
Emigration and Overseas Employment. This would also include close 
coordination and linkage with the Community Welfare Attaches abroad.  
 
6. 
Welfare of Pakistani emigrants abroad and their dependents in Pakistan. 
 
7. 
Periodic assessment, review and analysis of manpower resources and 
employment requirements overseas. 
 
8. 
Administrative control of Overseas Pakistanis Foundation. 
 
            9. 
Special Selection Board for selection of Community Welfare Attaches for 
posting in Pakistan Missions abroad. 
 
     10.  
Administration of- 
 
 
 (a)   the Emigration Ordinance, 1979, (XVIII of 1979) and; 
 
 
 (b)  the Control of Employment Ordinance, 1965 (XXXII of 1965); 
 
 
 (c)   the Workers Welfare Fund Ordinance, 1971 (XXXVI of 1971); 
 
 
 (d)  the Companies Profits (Workers Participation) Act, 1968 (XII of 1968);   
 
and  
 
 
   (e)  the Employees’ Old Age Benefits Act, 1976 (XIV of 1976) including     
supervision and control of the employees ‘ old age benefits institutions. 
 
11. 
Administrative control of:- 
 
 
(a)   Overseas Employment Corporation; and 
 
 
(b)   Bureau of Emigration and Overseas Employment. 
 
12. 
Foreign Employment and Emigration. 
 
                                                          
1 Inserted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 

 
66
13.   Administration of the Industrial Relations Act, 2012 (X of 2012), keeping a 
watch on labour legislation from international perspective, coordination of 
labour legislation in Pakistan and the Industrial Relations Commission. 
 
114.    Dealing and agreements with international organizations in the fields of labour 
and social security. 
 
 
28. 
Parliamentary Affairs Division 
 
1. 
Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament), summoning of either House or both Houses or 
Joint sitting of Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) and prorogation thereof. 
 
2. 
Dissolution of the National Assembly. 
 
3. 
Liaison between the Divisions and Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) in respect of 
official and non-official business; priority of official business. 
 
4. 
Follow up of the assurances, promises and undertakings given by the Federal 
Government on the floor of the House with a view to their implementation by 
the Divisions concerned. 
 
 
5. 
Submission of Bills passed by Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) or by the National 
Assembly to President for his assent. 
 
 
6. 
Legislation pertaining to privileges of Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) and 
members of Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament), salaries and allowances of the 
Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the Senate, Speaker and Deputy Speaker 
of the National Assembly and members of Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament). 
7. 
Legislation pertaining to the Leader of the House and the Leader of the 
Opposition, provision of staff and other facilities for the Leader of the House. 
 
8. 
Rules of Procedure of either House or Joint Sitting of Majlis-e-Shoora 
(Parliament). 
 
9. 
Legislation pertaining to punishment of persons who refuse to give evidence 
or produce documents before committees of National Assembly or the Senate. 
 
10. 
Appointment and terms and conditions of Federal Parliamentary Secretaries.  
 
11. 
Legislative business relating to the Election Commission. 
 
12. 
Prime Minister's Public Affairs and Grievances Wing. 
 
213. 
Administrative functions in respect of the following laws, namely:- 
(a)  
Members of Parliament (Salaries and Allowances) Act, 1974  
 
 
(XXVII of 1974); 
 
(b) 
Chairman and Speaker (Salaries, Allowances and Privileges) Act,  
 
            1975 (LXXXII of 1975);  
 
(c) 
Deputy Chairman and Deputy Speaker (Salaries, Allowances and  
 
            Privileges) Act, 1975 (LXXXIII of 1975); 
(d) 
Members of Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) Immunities and   
 
            Privileges Act, 2023 (XX of 2023) 
 
 
 
29. 
Petroleum Division 
 
1. 
All matters relating to oil, gas and mineral at the national and international 
levels, including- 
 
(i) 
policy, legislation, planning regarding exploration, development and 
production; 
                                                          
1 Added vide SRO 40(1)/2019 dated 11-01-2019 
2 Inserted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 

 
67
(ii) import, export, refining, distribution, marketing, transportation and 
pricing of all kinds of petroleum and petroleum products; 
(iii) matters bearing on international aspects; 
(iv) Federal agencies and institutions for promotion of special studies and 
development programmes. 
 
 
 
2. 
Geological Surveys. 
 
 
3. 
(i) 
Administration of Regulation of Mines and oil fields and Mineral 
Development (Federal Control), Act, 1948, and rules made thereunder, 
in so far as the same relate to exploration and production of petroleum, 
transmission, distribution of natural gas and liquified petroleum gas, 
refining and marketing of oil; 
(ii) 
Petroleum concessions agreements for land, off-shore and deep seas 
areas; 
(iii) Import of machinery, equipment, etc., for exploration and development 
of oil and natural gas. 
 
 
4. 
(i) 
Administration of Marketing of Petroleum Products (Federal Control) 
Act, 1974, and the rules made thereunder; 
  
 
 
(ii) Matters relating to Federal investments and undertakings wholly or partly 
owned by the Government in the field of oil, gas and minerals, excepting 
those assigned to the Industries and Production Division. 
 
 
5. 
Administration of-- 
 
(i) 
the Petroleum Products (Development Surcharges) Ordinance, 1961, and 
the rules made thereunder; 
(ii) the Natural Gas (Development Surcharges) Ordinance, 1967, and the 
rules made thereunder;  
(iii) The Esso Undertakings (Vesting) Ordinance, 1976; and 
 (iv)  Hydrocarbon Development Institute of Pakistan Act, 2006 (I of 2006) 
and the rules made thereunder. 
 
6. 
(i) 
Coordination of energy policy, including measures for conservation of 
energy and energy statistics; 
 
(ii) Omitted vide SRO No.802 (1)/2001, dated 27.11.2001. 
 
(iii) Secretariat of National Energy Policy Committee. 
 
7. 
Chief Inspector of Mines, Islamabad. 
 
8.        Omitted vide SRO 939(1)/2019 dated 19-08-2019. 
 
 
30.  
Planning, Development and Special Initiatives Division 
 
 1. 
(i) 
Preparation of comprehensive National Plan for the economic and social 
development of the country; 
 (ii) Formulation, within the framework of the National Plan, of an annual 
plan and an annual development programme; and 
 (iii) Recommendations concerning orderly adjustments therein in the light of 
new needs, better information and changing conditions. 
2. 
Monitoring the implementation of all major development projects and 
programmes; identification of bottlenecks and initiation of time remedial 
action. 
 
 
3. 
Evaluation of on-going and completed projects. 
 
4. 
Review and evaluation of the progress achieved in the implementation of the 
National Plan. 

 
68
 
 
5. 
Identification of regions, sectors and sub-sectors lacking adequate   
 
 
portfolio of projects and taking steps to stimulate preparation of sound  
 
 
projects in those areas. 
 
 
6. 
Continuous evaluation of the economic situation and coordination of 
economic policies. 
 
 
7. 
Organization of research in various sectors of the economy to improve the data 
base and information as well as to provide analytical studies which will help 
economic decision making. 
 
8. 
Association with the Economic Affairs Division in matters pertaining to 
external assistance in individual projects, form the stage prior to preliminary 
discussion up to the stage of final signing of documents with  
aid-giving agencies. 
 
9. 
Development of appropriate cost and physical standards for effective technical 
and economic appraisal of projects. 
 
10. 
Omitted vide SRO 1175(1) /2021 dated 14-09-2021. 
 
11. 
National Logistics Cell. 
 
 
12. 
Administrative control of-- 
 
(i) Economists and Planners Group; 
(ii) Pakistan Institute of Development Economics;  
 (iii) Pakistan Planning and Management Institute (PPMI); 
(iv) Jawaid Azfar Computer Center (JACC); 
(v) Public Private Partnership Authority (P3A); 
(vi) China Pakistan Economic Corridor Authority (CPEC); 
 (vii) Mechanized Construction Company Pakistan Limited (MCCPL); and 
(viii) National Construction Company Pakistan Limited (NCCPL). 
 
 
 
13. 
The Planning, Development and Special Initiatives Division shall act as the 
Secretariat of the Planning  Commission which  is  the apex  planning  and  
coordination  body under  the  Chairmanship  of  the  Prime  Minister.  The  
relationship between  the  Planning  Commission and the Planning,  
Development and Special Initiatives Division shall  be as  defined  in the  
Cabinet 
 
Division’s 
Resolution 
No.4-6/2006-Min.I, 
dated 
the  
30th October, 2013, as amended from time to time.  
 
14. 
Omitted vide SRO 389 (I)/2013 dated 15.05.2013 (F.No.4-5/2013-Min-I). 
 
 
15.  
Omitted vide SRO 389 (I)/2013 dated 15.05.2013 (F.No.4-5/2013-Min-I). 
 
16. 
Omitted vide SRO 389(I)/2013 dated   15.05.2013 (F.No.4-5/2013-Min-I). 
 
17-20. Omitted vide SRO1088 (I)/2011, (4-14/2011-Min-I) dated 09.12.2011. 
 
21. 
Omitted vide SRO 389 (I)/2013 dated 15.05.2013 (F.No.4-5/2013-Min-I). 
 
22.      Omitted vide SRO 1175(1) /2021 dated 14-09-2021. 
 
 
 
 
123. 
[Preparation of an overall integrated plan for development and improvement 
of statistics in Pakistan and to estimate the budgetary requirements thereof. 
 
24. 
Preparation of annual programmes in accordance with agreed priorities and to 
assign responsibilities for the execution of their component items. 
 
 
25. 
Examination and clearance of budgetary proposals for annual programmes 
                                                          
1 Added vide SRO 487 (1)/2019 dated 23-04-2019 

 
69
  
for statistical improvements and developments. 
 
26. 
Formulation of policy regarding general statistics for Pakistan and 
implementation thereof by suitably adapting the statistical system of Pakistan 
to conform with the policy. 
 
27. 
Coordination 
with 
the 
Provincial 
and 
Federal 
Governments,  
Semi-autonomous bodies and international organizations on statistical matters 
bearing directly or indirectly on such subjects as trade, industry, prices, 
expenditure, 
input-output 
accounts, 
flow 
of 
funds, 
balance 
of  
payments, etc. 
 
28. 
Evaluation and introduction of standard concepts, definition and classification 
pertaining to national statistics series. 
 
29. 
Preparation and implementation of in-service and foreign training programmes 
in the fields of statistics. 
 
 
30. 
Evaluation of efficiency computerized methods for statistical estimation. 
 
 
31. 
Clearance of statistical projects undertaken by different organizations on a  
  
contract basis. 
  
 
 
 32. 
Preparation, printing and release of publications on national statistics. 
 
33. 
Undertaking of national census and surveys. 
 
 
34. 
Administration of:- 
 
i. 
The Industrial Statistics Act, 1942 (XIX of 1942). 
ii. 
General Statistics (Reorganization) Act, 2011 (XIV of 2011). 
 
 
 
35. 
Agricultural Census, Population Census, National Quinquennial Livestock   
  
Census. 
 
36.  
Collection, maintenance and analyses of demographic, population  and 
vital 
health statistics. 
 
37. 
Compilation of labour, manpower and employment statistics for national and 
international consumption. 
 
38. 
Periodic assessment, review and analysis of manpower resources and 
requirements with reference to the employment situation in the country.] 
 
 
 39. 
Coordinate special initiatives as allocated by the Prime Minister. 
 
 
40. 
Periodic review of Public Sector Development Program and recommending 
necessary adjustments or re-appropriations in the overall development 
portfolio. 
 
41. 
Promoting and developing role of private sector in development process 
through institutionalized consultative process for undertaking development 
initiatives on innovative modes for financing the Public Private Partnership 
(Public Sector Development Program+), BOT, BOO, etc.  
 
142.   Administrative functions in respect of the National Logistics Corporation Act, 
2023 (LII of 2023). 
 
 
31.      Omitted vide SRO 1262(1)/2017 dated 20-12-2017 
 
 
31A    Omitted vide SRO 1025(1)/2020 dated 8th October, 2020. 
               
 
 
                                                          
1 Inserted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 

 
70
131AA. Poverty Alleviation and Social Safety Division 
 
1. 
Policies regarding social protection with objective to provide basic necessities 
of life, such as food, clothing, housing, education and medical relief, for all 
such citizens, as are permanently or temporarily unable to earn their livelihood 
on account of infirmity, sickness or unemployment. 
 
 
2. 
Policies and strategies regarding poverty alleviation with the objective of 
improving the quality of life of the poorest segments of society; monitoring 
implementation of such policies and strategies. 
 
3. 
Policies for mainstreaming the poverty alleviation and social protection 
concerns in the public sector expenditure. 
 
4. 
Establishment of various innovation challenges to design initiatives for 
poverty alleviation. 
 
5. 
Coordination with all relevant stakeholders including but not limited to 
concerned divisions and provincial governments for integration and 
synergizing of efforts and ensuring that all policies are made with a pro-poor 
focus. 
 
6. 
Working with non-government sector to design and implement pro-poor 
initiatives. 
 
7. 
Establishment of a time bound and output based Labour Advisory Council and 
implementation of the proposals thereof. 
 
8. 
Collection of Zakat and Usher, disbursement of Zakat and Usher to the 
Provinces and other areas as per formula approved by Council of Common 
Interests. 
 
9. 
Coordination with relevant ministries and provincial governments for poverty 
alleviation and social protection initiatives. 
 
10. 
Administration of: 
(i) 
Benazir Income Support Programme. 
(ii) 
Pakistan Bait-ul-Mal. 
 
            11.  
Administrative matters of: 
 
(i)    Trust for Voluntary Organizations. 
 
(ii)    Pakistan Poverty Alleviation Fund. 
 
(iii)   Centre for Social Entrepreneurship. 
 
(iv)   Centre for Rural Economy. 
 
           12.    
Poverty Alleviation Coordination Council.  
 
31B.      Power Division 
 
 
 
1. 
Matters relating to development of power resources of the country. 
 
 
2. 
Matters relating to electric utilities. 
 
3. 
Liaison with international engineering organizations in power sector. 
 
4. 
Federal agencies and institutions for promotion of special studies in power 
                                                          
1 Inserted vide SRO 487 (1)/2019 dated 23-04-2019 
 
 

 
71
sector. 
 
 
5. 
(a) 
Electricity; 
(b) 
Karachi Electric Supply Corporation and Pakistan Electric Agencies 
Limited. 
 
 
6.       Omitted vide SRO 1986 (I)/2024 dated 05-12-2024 
 
 
7. 
Private Power and Infrastructure Board. 
 
 
  8. 
Administrative Control of Alternative Energy Development Board. 
 
 
  9. 
Omitted vide SRO 939(1)/2019 dated 19-08-2019. 
 
 
10.     
1National Energy Efficiency and Conservation Authority. 
 
32. 
Privatization Division 
 
1. 
Privatization policies. 
 
2. 
The Transfer of Managed Establishments Order, 1978 (P.O.12 of 1978). 
 
3.  
Administration of the Privatization Commission Ordinance, 2000 (LII of 
2000). 
 
4. 
Negotiation with International organizations relating to the functions of 
Privatization in consultation with the Economic Affairs Division. 
 
5. 
Any item incidental or ancillary to the above. 
 
 
33. 
Railways Division 
  
 
 
1. 
All matters pertaining to Pakistan Railways. 
 
 
2. 
Movement and priority in respect of Defence traffic. 
 
 
3. 
Maintenance of railway lines for strategic reasons. 
 
4. 
Negotiations with international organizations and other countries and 
implementation of agreements, with them. 
 
5. 
Coordination of development projects of railways as a part of the national 
development programme. 
 
 
6. 
Standardization and specifications of materials and stores. 
 
 
7. 
Overall efficiency and safety of railways. 
 
 
8. 
Coordination of rail movements into and from Ports. 
  
34. 
Religious Affairs and Inter faith Harmony Division 
 
 
1. 
Pilgrimage beyond Pakistan; Muslim pilgrims visits to India. 
 
 
2. 
Ziarat and Umra. 
 
 
3. 
Welfare and safety of pilgrims and zairian.  
 
4. 
Administrative control of the Haj Directorate at Jeddah and dispensaries in 
Makkah and Medina. 
 
5. 
Islamic studies and research including holding of seminars, conferences, etc., 
on related subjects. 
 
                                                          
1 [From 16th April, 2022 to 6th September, 2023 National Energy Efficiency & Conservation remained under the Science & Technology 
Division (F. No.4-1/2022-Min-I)]. 

 
72
 
6. 
Training and education of Ulemas and Khatibs etc. 
 
7. 
Error-free and exact printing and publishing of the Holy Quran. 
 
8. 
Exchange of visits of scholars of Islamic learning and Education, international 
conferences/seminars on Islamic subject and liaison with foreign and 
international bodies and institutions. 
 
 
9. 
Ruet-e-Hilal. 
 
 
10. 
Tabligh. 
 
 
11. 
Omitted Vide SRO 850(I)2014, dated 25-09-2014. 
 
 
 
12. 
Observance of Islamic Moral Standards. 
 
13. 
Donations for religious purposes and propagation of Islamic Ideology abroad. 
 
 
14. 
Marriage and divorce, infants and minor's adoption. 
 
 
15. 
Auqaf. 
 
 
16.  
Omitted vide SRO 487(I)/2019 dated 23-04-2019. 
 
17.  
 Policy and legislation with regard to interfaith harmony. 
  
 
 
18.  
International agreements and commitments in respect of all religious 
communities and implementation thereof. 
 
 
19.   
Representation of Pakistan at UN Sub-Commission on Prevention of 
Discrimination to Minorities. 
 
20.  
Minorities’ Welfare Fund. 
 
21. 
Omitted vide SRO 964(I)/2025 dated 2nd June, 2025 
 
22. 
Evacuee Trust Property Board. 
 
 
35.  
Revenue Division 
 
1. 
1Tax Policy Functions relating to procedure including: 
(a) procedure of filing return, 
(b) assessment/modifications, 
(c) audit, 
(d) procedure of appeals and alternative dispute resolution mechanism 
including ADRC, 
(e) collection and recovery of taxes, 
(f) procedure of refunds, 
(g) methods of record keeping, 
(h) tax authorities and their functions, 
(i) jurisdiction, 
(j) limitations and condonations, 
(k) penalties and prosecutions, 
(l) general anti avoidance, and 
(m) rule making. 
                                                          
1 Substituted vide SRO 855(I)/2026 dated 11-05-2026 

 
73
 
2. 
Tax administration. 
 
3. 
1Agreements relating to matters other than taxation policies (including 
avoidance of double taxation). 
 
 
4. 
Administration of Customs and Excise Group, and Income Tax Group. 
 
5. 
The prosecution and defense of legal proceedings concerning the Revenue 
Division shall be conducted by the Revenue Division and Federal Board of 
Revenue.  
 
36.  
Science and Technology Division 
 
 
1. 
Establishment of science cities. 
 
2. 
Establishment of institutes and laboratories for research and development in 
the scientific and technological fields. 
 
3. 
Establishment of science universities as specifically assigned by the Federal 
Government. 
 
4. 
Planning, coordination, promotion and development of science and technology 
monitoring and evaluation of research and development works, including 
scrutiny of development projects and coordination of development 
programmes in this field. 
 
5. 
Promotion of applied research and utilization of results of research in the 
scientific and technological fields carried out at home and abroad. 
 
6. 
Guidance to the research institutions in the Federation as well as the provinces 
in the fields of applied scientific and technological research. 
 
 
7. 
Coordination of utilization of manpower for scientific and technological 
research. 
 
 
8. 
Promotion and development of industrial technology. 
 
9. 
Promotion of scientific and technological contacts and liaison nationally and 
internationally, including dealings and agreements with other countries and 
international organizations. 
 
 
10. 
Initiate promotional measures for establishment of venture capital  
 
companies for technological development and growth. 
 
 
11. 
Support to NGOs concerned with development of science and technology. 
 
12. 
Promotion of metrology Standards, Testing and Quality Assurance System. 
 
 
 
13. 
National Commission for Science and Technology. 
 
14. 
Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research. 
 
 
 
15. 
Omitted vide Cab: Div: Notification No.4-6/97-Min.I dated 3.3.1998. 
 
 
 
16. 
Omitted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 
 
 
 
17. 
Omitted vide SRO 226(I)/2010 (F.No.4-4/2007-Min-I), dated 02.04.2010. 
 
 
 
18. 
Council for Works and Housing Research. 
 
19-20.Omitted vide SRO 226(I)/2010, dated 02.04.2010. 
 
 
21. 
Omitted vide SRO 634(1)/2016, dated 22.7.2016 
 
 
                                                          
1 Substituted vide SRO 855(I)/2026 dated 11-05-2026 

 
74
 
22. 
Pakistan Science Foundation. 
 
 
 
23. 
National Institute of Electronics. 
 
 
 
24. 
Pakistan Council of Science and Technology. 
 
 
 
25. 
National Institute of Oceanography. 
 
 
          26-27. Omitted vide SRO 226(I)/2010, dated 02.04.2010. 
 
 
28. 
STEDEC Technology Commercialization Corporation of Pakistan (Private) 
 
 
Limited. 
 
 
29. 
National University of Sciences and Technology. 
 
 
30. 
Pakistan Standards and Quality Control Authority (PSQCA). 
 
31. 
Prescription of standards and measures for quality control of manufactured 
goods. 
 
 
 
 
32. 
Establishment of standards of weights and measures. 
 
33. 
Development, deployment and demonstration of renewable sources of energy. 
 
            34. 
Pakistan National Accreditation Council (PNAC). 
 
            35. 
Pakistan Council of Renewable Energy Technologies (PCRET). 
 
            36. 
COMSATS University, Islamabad. 
 
            37. 
Pakistan Engineering Council (PEC). 
 
 
 
 
 
38 & 39. Omitted vide SRO1088 (I)/2011, dated 09.12.2011. 
 
40.        Pakistan Halal Authority. 
 
 
41.        National University of Technology. 
 
142.      Administrative functions in respect of the National Metrology Institute of 
Pakistan Act, 2022 (XIX of 2022). 
 
236A. Special Investment Facilitation Council (SIFC) Division  
 
 
1. 
All secretarial work for the SIFC, Apex Committee of SIFC, Executive 
Committee of SIFC and inter-Ministerial working groups. 
2. 
Follow up and implementation of decisions and directives issued by the SIFC 
and all the bodies mentioned at entry 1. 
3. 
Coordination, monitoring and implementation of the investment proposals, 
MoUs and agreements with other countries, international agencies and forums. 
4. 
General coordination between the Federal Government and the Provinces in 
order to facilitate foreign and domestic investment in Pakistan. 
5. 
Coordination with the relevant Ministries, Divisions, Departments and 
Authorities of the Federal Government for investment facilitation. 
6. 
Coordinate and facilitate between Government, non-Government and private 
sector entities for promotion of investment and related activities, stakeholder 
and investment promotion strategies. 
7. 
Coordinate and facilitate all other tasks, assigned by SIFC in realm of the 
objectives defined for SIFC under the law.  
 
 
 
                                                          
1 Inserted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 
2 Inserted vide SRO 1986 (I)/2024 dated 05-12-2024 

 
75
37.  
 Omitted vide SRO 83(I)/2025 dated 4th February, 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
38. 
 Omitted vide SRO 487 (1)/2019 dated 23-04-2019 
 
 
 
39.    
Omitted vide SRO 1025(1)/2020 dated 8th October, 2020 
 
 
140. 
 Water Resources Division 
 
1. 
Matters relating to development of water resources of the country. 
 
2. 
Indus Waters Treaty, 1960, and Indus Basin Works. 
 
3. 
Water and Power Development Authority; 
 
 
4.    Liaison with international engineering organizations in water sector, such as    
 International Commission on Large Dams, International Commission on 
Irrigation  
and Drainage and International Commission on Large Power 
Systems (Cigre). 
 
5. 
Federal agencies and institutions for promotion of special studies in water 
sector. 
 
 
 
 
6. 
Institute of Engineers, Pakistan. 
 
 
 
 
7. 
Administrative control of Tubewell Construction Company. 
 
 
 
 
8. 
Indus River System Authority (IRSA). 
 
 
 
 
9. 
Pakistan Trans-border Water Organization. 
 
210.    Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources. 
 
                                                          
1 Substituted vide SRO 921(1)/2017, dated 13.09.2017 
2 Inserted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 

 
76
 
 
SCHEDULE III 
 
[rule-4(4)] 
 
LIST OF ATTACHED DEPARTMENTS DECLARED AS SUCH BY THE 
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT 
 
S.No. 
 
Name of Attached Department 
Name of Division to which  attached 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
1 
Omitted vide SRO 83(I)/2025 dated 4th February, 2025 
Omitted vide SRO 83(I)/2025 dated 
4th February, 2025 
2 
Omitted vide SRO 83(I)/2025 dated 4th February, 2025 
3 
Department of Communications Security 
 
 
Cabinet 
4 
Department of Stationery and Forms 
 
5 
Department of Archives 
6 
Pakistan Environmental Protection Agency 
Climate Change 
7 
Zoological Survey of Pakistan 
8 
Cotton Board 
 
Commerce  
9 
Directorate General of Trade Organization 
19A 
Textile Commissioner’s Organization 
10 
National Highways and Pakistan Motorways Police 
Department 
 
Communications 
210A 
Pakistan Post Office Department  
11 
Directorate of Military Land and Cantonments 
 
 
Defence 
12 
Federal Government Educational Institutions 
(Cantonments/Garrisons) Directorate 
13 
Pakistan Military Accounts Department 
314 
Survey of Pakistan 
15 
Pakistan Armed Services Board 
16 
Pakistan Maritime Security Agency 
416A 
Pakistan Meteorological Department 
516B 
Headquarters of Airports Security Force 
616C 
Bureau of Air Safety Investigation (BASI) 
17 
Directorate General Munitions Production (DGMP) 
Defence Production. 
18 
Secretariat Training Institute 
 
Establishment. 
 
19 
Staff Welfare Organization 
20 
Federal Public Service Commission 
21 
Akhtar Hameed Khan National Centre for Rural 
Development 
22 
National Training Bureau 
 
Federal Education and Professional 
23 
Pakistan Manpower Institute 
                                                          
1 Inserted vide SRO 1025(1)/2020, dated 8th October, 2020 
2 Inserted vide SRO 1025(1)/2020, dated 8th October, 2020 
3 Substituted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 
4 Inserted vide SRO 83(I)/2025 dated 4th February, 2025 
5 Inserted vide SRO 83(I)/2025 dated 4th February, 2025 
6 Added vide SRO 964(I)/2025 dated 2nd June, 2025 

 
77
24 
Federal Directorate of Education, Islamabad 
Training  
25 
Omitted vide SRO 939(1)/2019 dated 19-08-2019 
125A 
Pakistan Institute of Education 
225B 
Directorate General of Special Education 
26 
Central Directorate of National Savings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Finance. 
27 
Office of Auditor General of Pakistan 
[Although the office of the Auditor General of Pakistan has 
been categorized as an attached department, it has been 
empowered to exercise the administrative and financial 
powers 
as 
a 
Ministry/Division 
vide 
Finance 
Division’sO.M.No.f.5(17)/Exp-II/85-423, dtd.14.7.1987] 
 
28 
Office of the Controller General of Accounts 
29 
Pakistan Missions Abroad  
  
Foreign Affairs. 
30 
Estate Office 
Housing and Works 
31 
Omitted vide SRO. 1373(1)/2021 dated 01-12-2021 
32 
Office of the Director General, Pakistan Public Works 
Department 
 
32A 
Omitted vide SRO 1986 (I)/2024 dated 05-12-2024 
Omitted vide SRO 1986 (I)/2024 
dated 05-12-2024 
33 
Department of Explosives 
Industries and Production 
34 
Press Information Department 
 
Information and  Broadcasting  
35 
Directorate of Electronic Media and Publications 
36 
Implementation Tribunal for Newspaper Employees 
37 
Central Board of Film Censors Islamabad 
337A 
Digital Communication Department (DCD) 
38 
Omitted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-24 
Omitted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 
dated 11-09-24 
39 
Directorate General of Immigration and Passports 
 
 
 
 
 
4Interior and Narcotics Control 
40 
Directorate General of Civil Defence 
41 
Headquarters Pakistan Rangers, Lahore 
42 
Headquarters Pakistan Coast Guards 
43 
Headquarters of Frontier Corps, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa 
44 
Headquarters of Frontier Corps, Balochistan 
45 
Office of the Chief Commissioner, Islamabad Capital 
Territory 
46 
Headquarters Pakistan Rangers Sindh (South), Karachi 
47 
Headquarters Office of Federal Investigation Agency 
48 
Office of the Commandant Frontier Constabulary, Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa  
49 
Northern Areas Scouts 
549A 
Federal Criminal Prosecution Service 
649B 
Anti-Narcotics Force 
50 
Department of Tourist Services in Islamabad 
Inter Provincial Coordination 
750A 
Chief Commissionerate for Afghan Refugees, Islamabad 
8Kashmir Affairs, Gilgit-Baltistan 
                                                          
1 Inserted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-2024 
2 Inserted vide SRO 1986 (I)/2024 dated 05-12-2024 
3 Inserted vide SRO 1986 (I)/2024 dated 05-12-2024 
4 Substituted vide SRO 83(I)/2025 dated 4th February, 2025 
5 Inserted vide SRO 1986 (I)/2024 dated 05-12-2024 
6 Inserted vide SRO 83(I)/2025 dated 4th February, 2025 
7 Inserted vide SRO 83(I)/2025 dated 4th February, 2025 
8 Inserted vide SRO 83(I)/2025 dated 4th February, 2025 

 
78
150B 
Jammu and Kashmir Properties, Pakistan 
and States and Frontier Regions 
250C 
Directorate of Health Services (AK) 
51 
Directorate of Marine Fisheries, Karachi 
Maritime Affairs 
52 
Directorate of Dock Workers’ Safety, Karachi 
53 
Omitted vide SRO 83(I)/2025 dated 4th February, 2025 
Omitted vide SRO 83(I)/2025 dated 
4th February, 2025 
54 
Animal Quarantine Department 
 
 
 
National Food Security and 
Research  
55 
Department of Plant Protection 
56 
Agricultural Policy Institute, Islamabad 
57 
Federal Seed Certification and Registration, Islamabad 
58 
Plant Breeders’ Rights Registry 
 
59 
Directorate of Central Health Establishment 
 
 
National Health Services, 
Regulations and Coordination 
 
60 
Federal Government Services Hospital, Islamabad 
61 
Pakistan Institute of Medical Sciences 
 
361A 
National Institute of Population Studies, Training and 
Research 
62 
Department of Archaeology and Museums 
 
4National Heritage and Culture 
63 
 
National Language Promotion Department  
64 
National Library of Pakistan 
65 
Department of Libraries 
 
66 
 
Bureau of Emigration and Overseas Employment 
 
 
Overseas Pakistanis and Human 
Resource Development 
67 
Industrial Relations Commission 
68 
Directorate of Workers’ Education, Islamabad 
69 
Geological Survey of Pakistan         
Petroleum  
   69A 
Pakistan Bureau of Statistics (PBS) 
5Planning, Development and 
Special Initiatives  
70 
Omitted vide SRO 1025 (1)/2020 dated 08-10-2020 
Omitted vide SRO  1025  (1)/ 2020 
dated 08-10-2020 
71 
Pakistan Railways Headquarters Office 
Railways 
72 
Hajj and Umrah Directorate 
Religious Affairs and Inter-faith 
Harmony 
73 
Federal Board of Revenue          
Revenue 
74 
Omitted vide SRO 487 (1)/2019 dated 23-04-2019 
Omitted vide SRO  487  (1)/ 2019 
dated 23-04-2019 
75 
Omitted vide SRO 1025 (1)/2020 dated 08-10-2020 
Omitted vide SRO  1025  (1)/ 2020 
dated 08-10-2020 
76 
Office of the Chief Engineering Advisor and Chairman 
Federal Flood Commission 
 
 
Water Resources                  
 
77 
Office of the Pakistan for Indus Water 
 
 
                                                          
1 Inserted vide SRO 83(I)/2025 dated 4th February, 2025 
2 Inserted vide SRO 83(I)/2025 dated 4th February, 2025 
3 Added vide SRO 964(I)/2025 dated 2nd June, 2025 
4 Substituted vide SRO 1025(1)/2020, dated 8th October, 2020 
5 Substituted vide SRO 1025(1)/2020, dated 8th October, 2020 
 

 
79
SCHEDULE-IV 
[Rule 7 (2)] 
LIST OF OFFICERS AUTHORISED TO MAKE AND EXECUTE ORDERS AND 
OTHER INSTRUMENTS IN THE NAME OF THE PRESIDENT: 
 
1. 
Secretary, Special Secretary, Acting Secretary, Additional Secretary, Joint 
Secretary or Deputy Secretary to the Government of Pakistan or to the Cabinet or 
Section Officer, or an officer who is granted one of these ranks ex-officio, or an 
Officer on Special Duty authorized by the Division concerned. 
 
2. 
Secretary, Additional Secretary, Joint Secretary or Deputy Secretary or Section 
Officer in the President's Secretariat (Public) or 1[Prime Minister's Office]. 
 
Note:- The inclusion of these officers is intended to enable them to execute orders in the 
name of the President in respect of such matters only as relate to the staff in the 
President's Secretariat (Public) or 1[Prime Minister's Office]. 
 
3. 
Military Secretary to the President or to the Prime Minister or Officer on Special 
Duty or Assistant Secretary in the President's Secretariat (Personal) or 1[Prime 
Minister's Office]. 
 
Note:- The inclusion of these officers is intended to enable them to execute orders in the 
name of the President in respect of such matters only as relate to the staff in the 
President's Secretariat (Personal) or 1[Prime Minister's Office] and to the household 
of the President or Prime Minister. 
 
 
4. 
In respect of the matters within their jurisdiction:- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) Controller or Deputy Controller of Capital Issues, Financial Adviser, Joint 
Financial Adviser, Deputy Financial Adviser or Assistant Financial Adviser. 
 
(b) Director-General or Deputy Director-General, Pakistan Post Office Department 
[Omitted vide SRO 226(I)/2010 (F.No.4-4/2007-Min-I), dated 02.04.2010]. 
 
(c) Railway [2General Manager], Director, Joint Director and Deputy Director. 
5. 
In respect of orders issued under sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Imports and 
Exports (Control) Act, 1950, in accordance with the Import Policy approved by the 
Government -- the Chief Controller of Imports and Exports. 
 
                                                          
1 Substituted vide SRO 622 (I)/2013, (F. No. 4-8/2013-Min-I), dated 28.06.2013 
 
 
 
2 Substituted vide S.R.O. 226(I)/2010 (F.No.4-4/2007-Min-I), dated 02.4.2010 

 
80
 
1SCHEDULE V-A 
[Rule 15 (1) (g) (h)] 
LIST OF CASES TO BE SUBMITTED TO THE PRIME MINISTER FOR HIS ORDERS 
 
S.No. 
 
Reference to 
Constitutional/statutory 
provision, if any 
 
CABINET DIVISION 
 
1. 
Omitted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-24 
Omitted vide SRO 1434 
(I)/2024 dated 11-09-24 
21A. 
Appointment, resignation and removal of Special Assistants to the Prime Minister 
and of persons holding the Minister's status without Cabinet rank, determination 
of their salaries, allowances and privileges. 
--- 
31B. 
Rules for the convenient transaction of business of the Federal Government”. 
Articles 90 and 99 
41C. 
A Certificate of Secrecy and Fidelity to be signed by an Adviser to the Prime 
Minister or a Special Assistant to the Prime Minister upon entering office. 
--- 
 
DEFENCE DIVISION 
 
2. 
Appointment of, and above the rank of, Captain in the Navy, Colonel in the Army 
and Group Captain in the air Force, except Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff 
Committee, and the Chiefs of the Army Staff, Naval Staff and Air Staff. 
Provided the appointment of, and above the rank of, Lieutenant General 
in the Army and equivalent ranks in the other Defence Services will be 
made by the Prime Minister in consultation with the President. 
Relevant laws and Rules 
governing the Defence 
Forces read with Article 
243 of the Constitution. 
3. 
Dismissal, otherwise than by sentences of Courts Martial, of Commissioned 
officers of the Pakistan Armed Forces other than junior Commissioned Officers. 
-do- 
 
Provided that the dismissal of, or the imposition of any other penalties 
on, officers of and above the rank of Lieutenant General in the Army 
and equivalent in the other Defence Services will require the approval 
of the President on the advice of the Prime Minister vide item 14 of 
Schedule V-B. 
 
4. 
Petitions against sentences of dismissal, cashiering, imprisonment of death 
awarded by Courts Martial to Commissioned Officers of the Armed Forces of 
Pakistan (other than Junior Commissioned Officers). 
-do- 
 
Provided that petitions against the sentences of dismissal or any other 
penalties awarded by the Courts Martial to Commissioned Officers of 
an above the rank of Lieutenant General and equivalent ranks in the 
other Defence Services will require the approval of the President on the 
advice of the Prime Minister vide item 15 of Schedule V-B 
 
 
ESTABLISHMENT DIVISION 
 
5. 
Federal Public Service Commission. 
(a)    Omitted vide SRO No. 246(1)/2001, dated 26.4.2001. 
 
(b)    Non-acceptance of its advice. 
Article 242. 
55A 
Making of rules under the Civil Servants Act, 1973. 
 
 
FINANCE DIVISION 
 
6. 
Annual Budget Statement to be laid before the National Assembly. 
Articles 80 and 82. 
7. 
Authentication of Schedule of Authorised Expenditure. 
Article 83. 
8. 
Excess Budget Statement. 
Article 84. 
9. 
Raising of loans by Provincial Governments subject to certain conditions. 
Article 167 (3). 
 
FOREIGN AFFAIRS DIVISION 
 
10. 
Appointment of Heads of Pakistan Missions abroad and other representation 
down to the rank of Counsellor. 
Civil Servants 
(Appointment, 
Promotions and Transfer) 
Rules, 1973 as amended 
from time to time. 
110A. 
Permission to accept foreign honours and awards. 
Article 259(1). 
 
 
                                                          
1 Substituted vide Cab.Divn.O.M.No.104/8/85-Min.I, dated 04.08.1985 
2 Inserted vide SRO 135(I)/98, (F.No.4-6/97-Min-I), dated 3.3.1998 
3 Substituted vide S.R.O. 368 (I)/2010 (F.No.4-6/2010-Min-I) dated 01.06.2010 
4 Inserted vide SRO 464(1)/2017 (4-2/2016-Min-I) dated 12-06-2017 
5 Inserted vide SRO 135(I)/98, (F.No.4-6/97-Min-I), dated 03.03.1998 
 
 

 
81
 
2INTERIOR AND NARCOTICS CONTROL DIVISION 
 
11. 
Preventive Detention. 
Section 197 of Cr-PC and 
section 
5(2) 
of 
the 
Prevention of Corruption 
Act, 1947, read with the 
Government 
Servants 
(Efficiency 
and 
Discipline) Rules, 1973. 
112. 
Prosecution of an officer BPS-17 to 22 and heads of autonomous and semi 
autonomous bodies under the Federal Government in M-1 or equivalent grade and 
Provincial Chief Secretaries. 
 
 
5LAW AND JUSTICE DIVISION 
 
13. 
Appointment, etc, of members of the Administrative Courts and Tribunals for 
Federal subjects. 
Article 212. 
313A. 
Rejection of representations filed by an Agency under the Establishment of the 
Office of Wafaqi Mohtasib (Ombudsman) Order, 1983 (P.O.No.1 of 1983), where 
the recommendations of the Wafaqi Mohtasib are to be sustained for 
implementation. 
 
413B. 
Rejection of representations filed by the Revenue Division or its subordinate 
departments, offices and agencies under the Establishment of the Office of the 
Federal Tax Ombudsman Ordinance, 2000 (XXXV of 2000), where the 
recommendations of the Federal Tax Ombudsman are to be sustained for 
implementation. 
 
 
RAILWAYS DIVISION 
 
14. 
Appointment and terms and conditions of the Chairman, 1[General Manager] and 
Members of Railways Board. 
Article 3(1) and (4) of 
President's Order No.33 
of 1962. Also the Civil 
Servants 
(Appointment, 
Promotion and Transfer) 
Rules, 1973 as amended 
from time to time. 
15. 
Omitted vide SRO 226(I)/2010 (F.No.4-4/2007-Min-I), dated 02.04.2010. 
- 
 
ALL DIVISIONS 
 
16. 
Delegation of powers to Provinces. 
Article 146. 
17. 
Directions to provinces in certain cases. 
Article 149. 
18. 
Appointment of : 
(a) Secretaries to the Government of Pakistan and Officers in the Federal   
Secretariat down to the rank of Joint Secretary. 
 
 
 
 
(b) All Heads of Departments holding posts in BPS-20 and above or   
equivalent under the Federal Government. 
(c) Officers in BPS-20 and above other than those included in (a) & (b)   
above. 
 
Civil Servants 
(Appointment, Promotion 
and Transfer) Rules, 1973 
as amended from time to 
time. 
 
-do- 
 
-do- 
19. 
Appointment: 
 
(a) to a post in a corporation, an autonomous or semi autonomous body,   
authority, etc under the administrative control of any Ministry/Division   
of the Federal Government, carrying any of the Management Grades   
from M-I to M-III. 
 
(b) of a Government servant of BPS-20 or above against any post in a 
corporation, an autonomous or semi autonomous body, authority, etc.   
under the administrative control of any Ministry/Division of Federal   
Government. 
 
20. 
Omitted vide Cabinet Division Notification No.4-6/97-Min.I (SRO No.135 
(I)/98), dated 03.03.1998. 
 
                                                          
 
1Inserted vide SRO No.476(I)/2001, (F.No.4-6/2001-Min),dated 28.6.2001 
 
2Substituted vide SRO 83(I)/2025 dated 4th February, 2025 
3Inserted vide SRO No.476(I)/2001, (F.No.4-6/2001-Min),dated 28.6.2001 
4Added vide SRO No.476(I)/2001, (F.No.4-6/2001-Min), dated 28.6.2001 
5Substituted vide SRO 1260 (I)/2015, (F. No. 4-5/2013-Min-I), dated 18.12.2015 
6Omitted vide SRO 226(I)/2010 (F.No.4-4/2007-Min-I), dated 02.04.2010 

 
82
121. 
Disciplinary matters in respect of all officers in whose cases the Prime Minister is 
the Authority or the Appellate Authority in terms of rules made or covered under 
the Civil Servants Act, 1973 or under any other law or rules for the time being in 
force. 
Government Servants  
(Efficiency and 
Discipline) Rules, 1973, 
as amended from time to 
time. 
22. 
Disciplinary matters in respect of heads of corporations, bodies, authorities or 
organizations established by or under Federal laws or owned or controlled by the 
Federal Government in M-I or equivalent grade including imposition of major 
and minor penalties. 
 
23. 
Appointment required to be made by the Government under any law for the time 
being in force. 
Relevant law authorizing 
the appointment. 
 
24. 
Appeal cases in respect of Heads of the Statutory Corporations/Organizations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_____________________________ 
1 Substituted vide SRO 623(I)/2021 dated 27-05-2021

 
83
1SCHEDULE V-B 
[Rule 15-A (1)] 
LIST OF CASES REQUIRING ORDERS OF THE PRESIDENT ON THE ADVICE 
OF THE PRIME MINISTER 
 
S.No. 
 
Reference to 
Constitutional/statutory 
provision, if any 
1. 
Omitted vide SRO No.246(I)2001, dated 26.4.2001. 
 
 
CABINET DIVISION 
 
2. 
Appointment, resignation and removal of Federal Ministers & Ministers of 
State. 
Article 92(1) & (3). 
2A. 
Omitted vide SRO No.822 (I)/2002, dated 20.11.2002. 
 
2B. 
Omitted vide SRO No.822 (I)/2002, dated 20.11.2002. 
 
22C. 
Appointment of Federal Caretaker Cabinet (on advice of the Caretaker 
Prime Minister) 
Article 224(1A) 
22D. 
Appointment, resignation and removal of Provincial Governors, 
determination of their salaries, allowances and privileges 
Article 101 
22E. 
Appointment of Acting Governors (other than Speaker of the Provincial 
Assembly) during the absence of Governors 
Article 104 
3. 
Omitted vide S.R.O. 368 (I)/2010, (F.No.4-6/2010-Min-I) dated 1st June 
2010. 
 
4. 
Omitted vide SRO 226(I)/2010 (F.No.4-4/2007-Min-I), dated 02.04.2010. 
 
5. 
National Economic Council. Its Constitution and appointment of members. 
Article 156(1) 
6. 
Issue of Proclamation of Emergency and its revocation. 
Articles 232,233,236(1) 
7. 
Issue of Proclamation in case of failure of constitutional machinery in a 
Province and its revocation. 
Articles 234, 236(1) 
8. 
Determination of salaries, allowances and privileges of the President, 
Prime Minister, Federal Ministers, Ministers of State. 
Article 250 
9. 
Omitted vide Cabinet Division Notification No.4-6/97-Min.I (SRO 
No.135(I)/98 dated 03.03.1998. 
 
10. 
Appointment of Advisers and determination of their terms and conditions. 
Article 93(1) 
11. 
Omitted vide Cabinet Division Notification No.4-1/97-Min.I, dated 
06.01.1997. 
 
11A. 
Conferment of Awards. 
Article 259(2) 
12. 
Omitted vide SRO 1262 (1)/2017 dated 20-12-2017 
 
 
DEFENCE DIVISION 
 
12A. 
Appointment of Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff Committee, the Chief of 
the Army Staff, the Chief of the Naval Staff and the Chief of the Air Staff 
and determination of their salaries and allowances 
Article 243 
13. 
Raising, maintenance of and grant of Commissions in the Military, Navy 
and Air Force of Pakistan and Reserves of such Forces. 
Article 243 
14. 
Imposition of all penalties, including removal and dismissal from service 
on Armed Forced Officers of and above the rank of Lieutenant General in 
the Army and equivalent ranks in the other defence services otherwise 
than, by sentences of Court Martial. 
Relevant laws and rules 
governing the Defence 
Forces read with Article 
243. 
15. 
Petition against sentences of dismissals, cashiering, imprisonment or death 
awarded by Courts Martial to Armed Forces Officers of and above the rank 
of Lieutenant General in the Army and equivalent rank in the other 
Defence Services. 
Relevant laws and rules 
governing the Defence 
Forces read with Article 
243. 
15A. 
Directions as to the application of Law to a major aerodrome. 
Article 252 
15B. 
Omitted vide Cabinet Division Notification No.4-15/96-Min.I, dated 
19.11.1996. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________ 
1 Substituted vide Cabinet Division O.M.No.104/8/85-Min.I, dated 4.8.1985 
2 Inserted vide S.R.O. 368 (I)/2010 (F.No.4-6/2010-Min-I) dated 01.06.2010 
 

 
84
 
 
 
ESTABLISHMENT DIVISION 
 
15C. 
Federal Public Service Commission; its strength and the appointment, 
removal or resignation of the 11[Chairman and] members, and the terms and 
conditions of their service. 
Sections 3, 4 and 5 of the 
Federal Public Service 
Commission Ordinance, 
1977 (XLV of 1977). 
 
FINANCE DIVISION 
 
16. 
Rules relating to the custody etc of Federal Consolidated Fund and Public 
Account. 
Article 79 
17. 
National 
Finance 
Commission. 
Its 
constitution, 
reports 
and 
recommendations including the allocation of the shares of Provincial 
Governments in the proceeds of taxes. 
Article 160 
18. 
Omitted vide Cabinet Division Notification No.4-11/91-Min.I, dated 
22.10.1991. 
 
19. 
Auditor General of Pakistan : 
(i)   Appointment, removal, term of office and terms and conditions of 
service; 
(ii)  Functions and powers. 
 
Article 168(1) & (3) 
Article 169 
20. 
Principles and methods of keeping of accounts. 
Article 170 
21. 
Reports relating to the accounts of Federation. 
Article 171 
22. 
Issue of proclamation in case of financial emergency and its revocation. 
Articles 235, 236(1) 
22A. 
Omitted vide Cabinet Division Notification No.4-14/98-Min.I, dated 
01.02.1998. 
 
 
FOREIGN AFFAIRS DIVISION 
 
23. 
The declaration of war. 
 
24. 
Omitted vide SRO No.476 (I)/2001, dated 28.6.2001. 
- 
 
1INTERIOR AND NARCOTICS CONTROL DIVISION 
 
25. 
Grants of pardons, reprieves and respites and revision suspension or 
commutation of any sentence passed by any Court, tribunal or other 
authority, other than a court martial. 
Article 45 
26. 
Government of Islamabad Capital Territory. 
Article 258 
27. 
Omitted vide Cabinet Division Notification No.4-6/97-Min.I (SRO 
No.135(I)/98) dated  03.03.1998. 
 
 
INTER-PROVINCIAL COORDINATION DIVISION 
 
27A. 
 
Council of Common Interest. Its constitution and appointment of members.  
Article 153(1)&(2) 
 
LAW AND  JUSTICE DIVISION 
 
28. 
Submission of annual report to [each House of Majlis-e-Shoora 
(Parliament)] in relation to Federation on observance of Principles of 
Policy. 
Article 29(3) 
29. 
Promulgation of Ordinances. 
Article 89(1) 
30. 
Attorney General for Pakistan: Appointment, duties terms and conditions 
and resignation from office. 
Article 100 
31. 
Supreme Court : 
 
(a) Appointment of the Chief Justice, Acting Chief Justice and other 
Judges                       and their removal, allowances and privileges. 
 
(b) Sitting of the Court at places other than Islamabad. 
 
Articles 
177(1),180,181,182 and 
209(6) 
Article 183(2) 
32. 
High Court : 
 
Number of Judges, appointment of Chief Justices, Acting Chief Justices   
and other Judges and their transfers, removal, allowances and privileges. 
 
Articles 192(1),193(1), 
196, 197, 200 and 
209(6). 
33. 
Federal Shariat Court : number of Judges, their appointments, transfer, 
resignation, removal, allowances and privileges. 
Article 203(C) 
34. 
Rules for the appointment of officers and servants of Supreme Court and 
their terms and conditions of employment. 
Article 208 
35. 
Reference to Supreme Judicial Council. 
Article 209(5) 
36. 
Omitted vide Cabinet Division Notification No.4-6/97-Min.I (SRO 
No.135(I)/98) dated 03.03.1998. 
 
36A. 
Representations filed under Article 32 of the Establishment of the Office of 
Wafaqi Mohtasib (Ombudsman) Order, 1983 (P.O.No.1 of 1983), except 
the cases covered by serial No.13A of Schedule V-A. 
 
 
                                                          
1Substituted vide SRO 83(I)/2025 dated 4th February, 2025 
 

 
85
36B. 
Representations filed under section 32 of the Establishment of the Office of 
Federal Tax Ombudsman Ordinance, 2000 (XXXV of 2000), except the 
cases covered by serial No.13B of Schedule V-A. 
 
36C. 
Appointment of Judges of the Accountability Courts. 
 
36D. 
Council of Islamic Ideology : 
(i)     Appointment, resignation and removal of members and Chairman. 
(ii)    Rules of Procedure. 
Article 228(3) & (4) 
 
Article 231 
36E. 
Reference to Council of Islamic Ideology whether a proposed law is or is 
not repugnant to the Injunctions of Islam. 
Article 229 
 
MARITIME AFFAIRS DIVISION 
 
36F. 
Direction as to the application of a law to major port. 
Article 252 
 
PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS DIVISION 
 
37. 
Omitted vide SRO 634(1)/2016 (F.No.4-2/2016-Min-I) dated 22.7.2016 
 
38. 
Resignation of Speaker. 
Article 53(5) 
39. 
Summoning and prorogation of either House or both Houses of Majlis-e-
Shoora (Parliament) in Joint Sitting. 
Article 54(1) 
40. 
Dissolution of National Assembly. 
Article 58(1) 
41. 
Resignation of Chairman. 
Article 61. 
42. 
Rules of procedure for either House of Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament). 
Article 67(2) 
43. 
Assent to Bills other than Money Bills. 
Article 75(1)(a)(b) & 75(2) 
44. 
Assent of Money Bills. 
Article 75(1)(a). 
45. 
Omitted vide SRO 1260 (1)/2015, dated 18.12.2015. 
 
46. 
Assent to Bills passed in a Joint Sitting of Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament). 
Article 75(2). 
47. 
Rules of Procedure for Joint Sitting of and communications between the two 
Houses. 
Article 72(1). 
48. 
Assent to Bills amending the Constitution. 
Amended provisions of 
Article 239. 
48A. 
Referendum of any matter of national importance. 
Article 48(6) & (7). 
48B. 
Appointment of Chief Election Commissioner and members of Election 
Commission. 
Article 213. 
Article 218 (2)(b). 
49. 
Omitted vide SRO No. 964(I)/2014, dated 29.10.2014. 
 
50. 
Omitted vide SRO No. 964(I)/2014, dated 29.10.2014. 
 
 
REVENUE DIVISION 
 
50A. 
Bills affecting taxes in which Provinces are interested. 
Article 162. 
 
STATES AND FRONTIER REGIONS DIVISION 
 
51. 
Omitted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-24 
Omitted vide SRO 1434 
(I)/2024 dated 11-09-24 
 
WATER RESOURCES DIVISION 
 
52. 
Commission to look into complaints as to interference with water supplies. 
Article 155(2). 
 
ALL DIVISIONS 
 
53. 
Direction to Governor to discharge certain functions as agent of the 
President in relation to areas not included in any Province. 
Article 145(1). 
54. 
Reference to Supreme Court on any question of law. 
Article 186. 
55. 
Omitted vide Cabinet Division Notification No.4-6/97-Min.I (SRO No.135 
(I)/98) dated 03.03.1998. 
 
56. 
-do- 
 
57. 
-do- 
 
158. 
All such cases where any function is to be performed or any orders have to 
be issued by the President or his specific approval is required under any 
statutory provision.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_____________________________ 
1 Added vide SRO 623(I)/2021 dated 27-05-2021 
 

 
86
1SCHEDULE VI 
[Rule 15-A (2)] 
LIST OF CASES TO BE SUBMITTED TO THE PRESIDENT FOR HIS ORDERS IN 
HIS DISCRETION 
 
 
S. 
No. 
 
Provision 
 
Reference to 
Constitutional 
Provisions 
 
 
 
1. 
 
 
 
 
2.  
 
 
 
 
CABINET DIVISION 
 
Appointment of Care-taker Prime Minister   (in consultation 
with the outgoing Prime Minister and the leader of the 
opposition in outgoing National Assembly). 
 
PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS DIVISION 
Dissolution of National Assembly under clause (2) of Article 
58. 
 
 
 
 
 
Article 224 (1A) 
 
 
 
Article 58(2) 
 
 
                                                          
1Substituted vide S.R.O. 368 (I)/2010 (F.No.4-6/2010-Min), dated 1st June 2010  

 
87
1SCHEDULE VII 
[RULE 15-A (3)] 
CASES AND PAPERS TO BE SUBMITTED TO THE PRESIDENT FOR 
INFORMATION 
1. All Cypher messages and telegrams. 
22. Summaries for the Cabinet, Committees of the Cabinet, National Economic Council, 
ECNEC, Council of Common Interests and the minutes and decisions of their meetings. 
 
23. Annual and periodical reports of Indus River System Authority (IRSA). 
24. Annual and periodical reports of the Federal Tax Ombudsman. 
5. Intelligence Reports (daily, weekly and special reports of DIB and D.G. ISI). 
6. Cases of appointments of Federal Secretaries and Provincial Chief Secretaries and to 
posts of BPS-22 and above in the Federal Government as well as appointments of heads 
of autonomous bodies under the Federal Government (including statutory Corporations 
and Authorities) in grades equivalent to grade-22 or in M-I grade. 
 
7. Reports of Commissions of Enquiry appointed by the President. 
38. Periodical reports of the Federally administered areas including northern areas. 
9. Periodical reports of the Government of Azad Jammu and Kashmir. 
10. Minutes and decisions of meetings of the Azad Jammu and Kashmir Council. 
11. Annual Reports of the Public Service Commission. 
12. Annual Reports of the Council of Islamic Ideology. 
13. Annual/Periodic reports of the Ombudsman (Wafaqi Mohtasib). 
14. Periodical reports of the Provincial Governments and Islamabad Capital Territory 
Administration. 
 
15. Periodical reports of the activities of Pakistan's Missions abroad. 
16. Periodical reports of the activities of Federal Ministries and Divisions. 
17. All documents issued by the Finance Minister pertaining to the Annual Budget. 
217A. Report of the Auditor-General of Pakistan. 
417B. Annual report of National Accountability Bureau (NAB). 
18. Daily Press Reports and International Media Digest issued by the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting. 
 
19. All other important cases involving question of policy and principles. 
20. Papers pertaining to any other matter required by the President through a general or 
special order. 
 
521.  All matters of internal and foreign policy and on all legislative proposals the Federal 
Government intends to bring before Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament). 
********** 
                                                          
 
                                                          
1 Inserted vide Cabinet Division's O.M.No.104/8/85-Min-I, dated 4-8-1985 
2 Substituted/Inserted vide SRO 790 (I)/2002, (F. No. 4-18/2002-MIn), dated 12th November, 2002 
 
 
3 Substituted vide SRO 1434 (I)/2024 dated 11-09-24 
 
4 Inserted vide SRO No.561(I)/2004, (F.No.4-3/2004-Min-I), dated 6.7.2004 
5 Inserted vide S.R.O. 368 (I)/2010 (F.No.4-6/2010-Min-I) dated 1st June 2010 
